
DRAKESTAIL was very little, that is why he was called Drakestail; but
tiny as he was he had brains, and he knew what he was about, for having
begun with nothing he ended by amassing a hundred crowns. Now the King
of the country, who was very extravagant and never kept any money,
having heard that Drakestail had some, went one day in his own person
to borrow his hoard, and, my word, in those days Drakestail was not a
little proud of having lent money to the King. But after the first and
second year, seeing that they never even dreamed of paying the interest,
he became uneasy, so much so that at last he resolved to go and see His
Majesty himself, and get repaid. So one fine morning Drakestail, very
spruce and fresh, takes the road, singing: 'Quack, quack, quack, when
shall I get my money back?'
He had not gone far when he met friend Fox, on his rounds that way.
'Good-morning, neighbour,' says the friend, 'where are you off to so
early?'
'I am going to the King for what he owes me.'
'Oh! take me with thee!'
Drakestail said to himself: 'One can't have too many friends.' ... 'I
will,' says he, 'but going on all-fours you will soon be tired. Make
yourself quite small, get into my throat--go into my gizzard and I will
carry you.'
'Happy thought!' says friend Fox.
He takes bag and baggage, and, presto! is gone like a letter into the
post.
And Drakestail is off again, all spruce and fresh, still singing:
'Quack, quack, quack, when shall I have my money back?'
He had not gone far when he met his lady-friend Ladder, leaning on her
wall.
'Good morning, my duckling,' says the lady friend, 'whither away so
bold?'
'I am going to the King for what he owes me.'
'Oh! take me with thee!'
Drakestail said to himself: 'One can't have too many friends.' ... 'I
will,' says he, 'but with your wooden legs you will soon be tired. Make
yourself quite small, get into my throat--go into my gizzard and I will
carry you.'
'Happy thought!' says my friend Ladder, and nimble, bag and baggage,
goes to keep company with friend Fox.
And 'Quack, quack, quack.' Drakestail is off again, singing and spruce
as before. A little farther he meets his sweetheart, my friend River,
wandering quietly in the sunshine.
'Thou, my cherub,' says she, 'whither so lonesome, with arching tail, on
this muddy road?'
'I am going to the King, you know, for what he owes me.'
'Oh! take me with thee!'
Drakestail said to himself: 'We can't be too many friends.'... 'I will,'
says he, 'but you who sleep while you walk will soon be tired. Make
yourself quite small, get into my throat--go into my gizzard and I will
carry you.'
'Ah! happy thought!' says my friend River.
She takes bag and baggage, and glou, glou, glou, she takes her place
between friend Fox and my friend Ladder.
And 'Quack, quack, quack.' Drakestail is off again singing.
A little farther on he meets comrade Wasp's-nest, manoeuvring his wasps.
'Well, good-morning, friend Drakestail,' said comrade Wasp's-nest,
'where are we bound for so spruce and fresh?'
'I am going to the King for what he owes me.'
'Oh! take me with thee!'
Drakestail said to himself, 'One can't have too many friends.'... 'I
will,' says he, 'but with your battalion to drag along, you will soon be
tired. Make yourself quite small, go into my throat--get into my gizzard
and I will carry you.'
'By Jove I that's a good idea!' says comrade Wasp's-nest.
And left file! he takes the same road to join the others with all
his party. There was not much more room, but by closing up a bit they
managed.... And Drakestail is off again singing.
He arrived thus at the capital, and threaded his way straight up the
High Street, still running and singing 'Quack, quack, quack, when shall
I get my money back?' to the great astonishment of the good folks, till
he came to the King's palace.
He strikes with the knocker: 'Toc! toc!'
'Who is there?' asks the porter, putting his head out of the wicket.
''Tis I, Drakestail. I wish to speak to the King.'
'Speak to the King!... That's easily said. The King is dining, and will
not be disturbed.'
'Tell him that it is I, and I have come he well knows why.'
The porter shuts his wicket and goes up to say it to the King, who was
just sitting down to dinner with a napkin round his neck, and all his
ministers.
'Good, good!' said the King laughing. 'I know what it is! Make him come
in, and put him with the turkeys and chickens.'
The porter descends.
'Have the goodness to enter.'
'Good!' says Drakestail to himself, 'I shall now see how they eat at
court.'
'This way, this way,' says the porter. 'One step further.... There,
there you are.'
'How? what? in the poultry yard?'
Fancy how vexed Drakestail was!
'Ah! so that's it,' says he. 'Wait! I will compel you to receive me.
Quack, quack, quack, when shall I get my money back?' But turkeys and
chickens are creatures who don't like people that are not as themselves.
When they saw the new-comer and how he was made, and when they heard him
crying too, they began to look black at him.
'What is it? what does he want?'
Finally they rushed at him all together, to overwhelm him with pecks.
'I am lost!' said Drakestail to himself, when by good luck he remembers
his comrade friend Fox, and he cries:
'Reynard, Reynard, come out of your earth, Or Drakestail's life is of
little worth.'
Then friend Fox, who was only waiting for these words, hastens out,
throws himself on the wicked fowls, and quick! quack! he tears them to
pieces; so much so that at the end of five minutes there was not one
left alive. And Drakestail, quite content, began to sing again, 'Quack,
quack, quack, when shall I get my money back?'
When the King who was still at table heard this refrain, and the poultry
woman came to tell him what had been going on in the yard, he was
terribly annoyed.
He ordered them to throw this tail of a drake into the well, to make an
end of him.
And it was done as he commanded. Drakestail was in despair of getting
himself out of such a deep hole, when he remembered his lady friend, the
Ladder.

     'Ladder, Ladder, come out of thy hold,
     Or Drakestail's days will soon be told.'

My friend Ladder, who was only waiting for these words, hastens out,
leans her two arms on the edge of the well, then Drakestail climbs
nimbly on her back, and hop! he is in the yard, where he begins to sing
louder than ever.
When the King, who was still at table and laughing at the good trick he
had played his creditor, heard him again reclaiming his money, he became
livid with rage.
He commanded that the furnace should be heated, and this tail of a drake
thrown into it, because he must be a sorcerer.
The furnace was soon hot, but this time Drakestail was not so afraid; he
counted on his sweetheart, my friend River.

     'River, River, outward flow,
     Or to death Drakestail must go.'

My friend River hastens out, and errouf! throws herself into the
furnace, which she floods, with all the people who had lighted it; after
which she flowed growling into the hall of the palace to the height of
more than four feet.
And Drakestail, quite content, begins to swim, singing deafeningly,
'Quack, quack, quack, when shall I get my money back?'
The King was still at table, and thought himself quite sure of his game;
but when he heard Drakestail singing again, and when they told him all
that had passed, he became furious and got up from table brandishing his
fists.
'Bring him here, and I'll cut his throat! bring him here quick!' cried
he.
And quickly two footmen ran to fetch Drakestail.
'At last,' said the poor chap, going up the great stairs, 'they have
decided to receive me.'
Imagine his terror when on entering he sees the King as red as a turkey
cock, and all his ministers attending him standing sword in hand. He
thought this time it was all up with him. Happily, he remembered that
there was still one remaining friend, and he cried with dying accents:
     'Wasp's-nest, Wasp's-nest, make a sally,
     Or Drakestail nevermore may rally.'

Hereupon the scene changes.
'Bs, bs, bayonet them! 'The brave Wasp's-nest rushes out with all his
wasps. They threw themselves on the infuriated King and his ministers,
and stung them so fiercely in the face that they lost their heads, and
not knowing where to hide themselves they all jumped pell-mell from the
window and broke their necks on the pavement.
Behold Drakestail much astonished, all alone in the big saloon and
master of the field. He could not get over it.
Nevertheless, he remembered shortly what he had come for to the palace,
and improving the occasion, he set to work to hunt for his dear money.
But in vain he rummaged in all the drawers; he found nothing; all had
been spent.
And ferreting thus from room to room he came at last to the one with the
throne in it, and feeling fatigued, he sat himself down on it to think
over his adventure. In the meanwhile the people had found their King and
his ministers with their feet in the air on the pavement, and they
had gone into the palace to know how it had occurred. On entering the
throne-room, when the crowd saw that there was already someone on the
royal seat, they broke out in cries of surprise and joy:

     'The King is dead, long live the King!
       Heaven has sent us down this thing.'

Drakestail, who was no longer surprised at anything, received the
acclamations of the people as if he had never done anything else all his
life.


THE RATCATCHER
A VERY long time ago the town of Hamel in Germany was invaded by bands
of rats, the like of which had never been seen before nor will ever be
again.
They were great black creatures that ran boldly in broad daylight
through the streets, and swarmed so, all over the houses, that people
at last could not put their hand or foot down anywhere without touching
one. When dressing in the morning they found them in their breeches and
petticoats, in their pockets and in their boots; and when they wanted a
morsel to eat, the voracious horde had swept away everything from cellar
to garret. The night was even worse. As soon as the lights were out,
these untiring nibblers set to work. And everywhere, in the ceilings,
in the floors, in the cupboards, at the doors, there was a chase and a
rummage, and so furious a noise of gimlets, pincers, and saws, that a
deaf man could not have rested for one hour together.
Neither cats nor dogs, nor poison nor traps, nor prayers nor candles
burnt to all the saints--nothing would do anything. The more they killed
the more came. And the inhabitants of Hamel began to go to the dogs (not
that THEY were of much use), when one Friday there arrived in the town a
man with a queer face, who played the bagpipes and sang this refrain:
     'Qui vivra verra:
     Le voila,
     Le preneur des rats.'

He was a great gawky fellow, dry and bronzed, with a crooked nose, a
long rat-tail moustache, two great yellow piercing and mocking eyes,
under a large felt hat set off by a scarlet cock's feather. He was
dressed in a green jacket with a leather belt and red breeches, and on
his feet were sandals fastened by thongs passed round his legs in the
gipsy fashion.
That is how he may be seen to this day, painted on a window of the
cathedral of Hamel.
He stopped on the great market-place before the town hall, turned his
back on the church and went on with his music, singing:

     'Who lives shall see:
     This is he,
     The ratcatcher.'

The town council had just assembled to consider once more this plague of
Egypt, from which no one could save the town.
The stranger sent word to the counsellors that, if they would make it
worth his while, he would rid them of all their rats before night, down
to the very last.
'Then he is a sorcerer!' cried the citizens with one voice; 'we must
beware of him.'
The Town Counsellor, who was considered clever, reassured them.
He said: 'Sorcerer or no, if this bagpiper speaks the truth, it was he
who sent us this horrible vermin that he wants to rid us of to-day for
money. Well, we must learn to catch the devil in his own snares. You
leave it to me.'
'Leave it to the Town Counsellor,' said the citizens one to another.
And the stranger was brought before them.
'Before night,' said he, 'I shall have despatched all the rats in Hamel
if you will but pay me a gros a head.'
'A gros a head!' cried the citizens, 'but that will come to millions of
florins!'
The Town Counsellor simply shrugged his shoulders and said to the
stranger:
'A bargain! To work; the rats will be paid one gros a head as you ask.'
The bagpiper announced that he would operate that very evening when the
moon rose. He added that the inhabitants should at that hour leave the
streets free, and content themselves with looking out of their windows
at what was passing, and that it would be a pleasant spectacle. When
the people of Hamel heard of the bargain, they too exclaimed: 'A gros a
head! but this will cost us a deal of money!'
'Leave it to the Town Counsellor,' said the town council with a
malicious air. And the good people of Hamel repeated with their
counsellors, 'Leave it to the Town Counsellor.'
Towards nine at night the bagpiper re-appeared on the market place. He
turned, as at first, his back to the church, and the moment the moon
rose on the horizon, 'Trarira, trari!' the bagpipes resounded.
It was first a slow, caressing sound, then more and more lively and
urgent, and so sonorous and piercing that it penetrated as far as the
farthest alleys and retreats of the town.
Soon from the bottom of the cellars, the top of the garrets, from under
all the furniture, from all the nooks and corners of the houses, out
come the rats, search for the door, fling themselves into the street,
and trip, trip, trip, begin to run in file towards the front of the town
hall, so squeezed together that they covered the pavement like the waves
of flooded torrent.
When the square was quite full the bagpiper faced about, and, still
playing briskly, turned towards the river that runs at the foot of the
walls of Hamel.
Arrived there he turned round; the rats were following.
'Hop! hop!' he cried, pointing with his finger to the middle of the
stream, where the water whirled and was drawn down as if through a
funnel. And hop! hop! without hesitating, the rats took the leap, swam
straight to the funnel, plunged in head foremost and disappeared.
The plunging continued thus without ceasing till midnight.
At last, dragging himself with difficulty, came a big rat, white with
age, and stopped on the bank.
It was the king of the band.
'Are they all there, friend Blanchet?' asked the bagpiper.
'They are all there,' replied friend Blanchet.
'And how many were they?'
'Nine hundred and ninety thousand, nine hundred and ninety-nine.'
'Well reckoned?'
'Well reckoned.'
'Then go and join them, old sire, and au revoir.'
Then the old white rat sprang in his turn into the river, swam to the
whirlpool and disappeared.
When the bagpiper had thus concluded his business he went to bed at
his inn. And for the first time during three months the people of Hamel
slept quietly through the night.
The next morning, at nine o'clock, the bagpiper repaired to the town
hall, where the town council awaited him.
'All your rats took a jump into the river yesterday,' said he to the
counsellors, 'and I guarantee that not one of them comes back. They were
nine hundred and ninety thousand, nine hundred and ninety-nine, at one
gros a head. Reckon!'
'Let us reckon the heads first. One gros a head is one head the gros.
Where are the heads?'
The ratcatcher did not expect this treacherous stroke. He paled with
anger and his eyes flashed fire.
'The heads!' cried he, 'if you care about them, go and find them in the
river.'
'So,' replied the Town Counsellor, 'you refuse to hold to the terms of
your agreement? We ourselves could refuse you all payment. But you have
been of use to us, and we will not let you go without a recompense,' and
he offered him fifty crowns.
'Keep your recompense for yourself,' replied the ratcatcher proudly. 'If
you do not pay me I will be paid by your heirs.'
Thereupon he pulled his hat down over his eyes, went hastily out of the
hall, and left the town without speaking to a soul.
When the Hamel people heard how the affair had ended they rubbed their
hands, and with no more scruple than their Town Counsellor, they laughed
over the ratcatcher, who, they said, was caught in his own trap. But
what made them laugh above all was his threat of getting himself paid by
their heirs. Ha! they wished that they only had such creditors for the
rest of their lives.
Next day, which was a Sunday, they all went gaily to church, thinking
that after Mass they would at last be able to eat some good thing that
the rats had not tasted before them.
They never suspected the terrible surprise that awaited them on their
return home. No children anywhere, they had all disappeared!
'Our children! where are our poor children?' was the cry that was soon
heard in all the streets.
Then through the east door of the town came three little boys, who cried
and wept, and this is what they told:
While the parents were at church a wonderful music had resounded. Soon
all the little boys and all the little girls that had been left at home
had gone out, attracted by the magic sounds, and had rushed to the great
market-place. There they found the ratcatcher playing his bagpipes at
the same spot as the evening before. Then the stranger had begun to
walk quickly, and they had followed, running, singing and dancing to the
sound of the music, as far as the foot of the mountain which one sees on
entering Hamel. At their approach the mountain had opened a little, and
the bagpiper had gone in with them, after which it had closed again.
Only the three little ones who told the adventure had remained outside,
as if by a miracle. One was bandy-legged and could not run fast enough;
the other, who had left the house in haste, one foot shod the other
bare, had hurt himself against a big stone and could not walk without
difficulty; the third had arrived in time, but in harrying to go in with
the others had struck so violently against the wall of the mountain that
he fell backwards at the moment it closed upon his comrades.
At this story the parents redoubled their lamentations. They ran with
pikes and mattocks to the mountain, and searched till evening to find
the opening by which their children had disappeared, without being able
to find it. At last, the night falling, they returned desolate to Hamel.
But the most unhappy of all was the Town Counsellor, for he lost three
little boys and two pretty little girls, and to crown all, the people
of Hamel overwhelmed him with reproaches, forgetting that the evening
before they had all agreed with him.
What had become of all these unfortunate children?
The parents always hoped they were not dead, and that the rat-catcher,
who certainly must have come out of the mountain, would have taken them
with him to his country. That is why for several years they sent in
search of them to different countries, but no one ever came on the trace
of the poor little ones.
It was not till much later that anything was to be heard of them.
About one hundred and fifty years after the event, when there was no
longer one left of the fathers, mothers, brothers or sisters of that
day, there arrived one evening in Hamel some merchants of Bremen
returning from the East, who asked to speak with the citizens. They told
that they, in crossing Hungary, had sojourned in a mountainous country
called Transylvania, where the inhabitants only spoke German, while all
around them nothing was spoken but Hungarian. These people also declared
that they came from Germany, but they did not know how they chanced to
be in this strange country. 'Now,' said the merchants of Bremen, 'these
Germans cannot be other than the descendants of the lost children of
Hamel.'
The people of Hamel did not doubt it; and since that day they regard it
as certain that the Transylvanians of Hungary are their country folk,
whose ancestors, as children, were brought there by the ratcatcher.
There are more difficult things to believe than that.(16)

