
ONCE upon a time there was a poor widow who lived in a little cottage
with her only son Jack.
Jack was a giddy, thoughtless boy, but very kind-hearted and
affectionate. There had been a hard winter, and after it the poor
woman had suffered from fever and ague. Jack did no work as yet, and by
degrees they grew dreadfully poor. The widow saw that there was no means
of keeping Jack and herself from starvation but by selling her cow; so
one morning she said to her son, 'I am too weak to go myself, Jack, so
you must take the cow to market for me, and sell her.'
Jack liked going to market to sell the cow very much; but as he was on
the way, he met a butcher who had some beautiful beans in his hand. Jack
stopped to look at them, and the butcher told the boy that they were
of great value, and persuaded the silly lad to sell the cow for these
beans.
When he brought them home to his mother instead of the money she
expected for her nice cow, she was very vexed and shed many tears,
scolding Jack for his folly. He was very sorry, and mother and son went
to bed very sadly that night; their last hope seemed gone.
At daybreak Jack rose and went out into the garden.
'At least,' he thought, 'I will sow the wonderful beans. Mother says
that they are just common scarlet-runners, and nothing else; but I may
as well sow them.'
So he took a piece of stick, and made some holes in the ground, and put
in the beans.
That day they had very little dinner, and went sadly to bed, knowing
that for the next day there would be none and Jack, unable to sleep from
grief and vexation, got up at day-dawn and went out into the garden.
What was his amazement to find that the beans had grown up in the night,
and climbed up and up till they covered the high cliff that sheltered
the cottage, and disappeared above it! The stalks had twined and twisted
themselves together till they formed quite a ladder.
'It would be easy to climb it,' thought Jack.
And, having thought of the experiment, he at once resolved to carry it
out, for Jack was a good climber. However, after his late mistake about
the cow, he thought he had better consult his mother first.

WONDERFUL GROWTH OF THE BEANSTALK

So Jack called his mother, and they both gazed in silent wonder at the
Beanstalk, which was not only of great height, but was thick enough to
bear Jack's weight.
'I wonder where it ends,' said Jack to his mother; 'I think I will climb
up and see.'
His mother wished him not to venture up this strange ladder, but Jack
coaxed her to give her consent to the attempt, for he was certain there
must be something wonderful in the Beanstalk; so at last she yielded to
his wishes.
Jack instantly began to climb, and went up and up on the ladder-like
bean till everything he had left behind him--the cottage, the village,
and even the tall church tower--looked quite little, and still he could
not see the top of the Beanstalk.
Jack felt a little tired, and thought for a moment that he would go back
again; but he was a very persevering boy, and he knew that the way to
succeed in anything is not to give up. So after resting for a moment he
went on.
After climbing higher and higher, till he grew afraid to look down for
fear he should be giddy, Jack at last reached the top of the Beanstalk,
and found himself in a beautiful country, finely wooded, with beautiful
meadows covered with sheep. A crystal stream ran through the pastures;
not far from the place where he had got off the Beanstalk stood a fine,
strong castle.
Jack wondered very much that he had never heard of or seen this castle
before; but when he reflected on the subject, he saw that it was as much
separated from the village by the perpendicular rock on which it stood
as if it were in another land.
While Jack was standing looking at the castle, a very strange-looking
woman came out of the wood, and advanced towards him.
She wore a pointed cap of quilted red satin turned up with ermine, her
hair streamed loose over her shoulders, and she walked with a staff.
Jack took off his cap and made her a bow.
'If you please, ma'am,' said he, 'is this your house?'
'No,' said the old lady. 'Listen, and I will tell you the story of that
castle.
'Once upon a time there was a noble knight, who lived in this castle,
which is on the borders of Fairyland. He had a fair and beloved wife and
several lovely children: and as his neighbours, the little people,
were very friendly towards him, they bestowed on him many excellent and
precious gifts.
'Rumour whispered of these treasures; and a monstrous giant, who lived
at no great distance, and who was a very wicked being, resolved to
obtain possession of them.
'So he bribed a false servant to let him inside the castle, when the
knight was in bed and asleep, and he killed him as he lay. Then he went
to the part of the castle which was the nursery, and also killed all the
poor little ones he found there.
'Happily for her, the lady was not to be found. She had gone with her
infant son, who was only two or three months old, to visit her old
nurse, who lived in the valley; and she had been detained all night
there by a storm.
'The next morning, as soon as it was light, one of the servants at the
castle, who had managed to escape, came to tell the poor lady of the sad
fate of her husband and her pretty babes. She could scarcely believe
him at first, and was eager at once to go back and share the fate of her
dear ones; but the old nurse, with many tears, besought her to remember
that she had still a child, and that it was her duty to preserve her
life for the sake of the poor innocent.
'The lady yielded to this reasoning, and consented to remain at her
nurse's house as the best place of concealment; for the servant told her
that the giant had vowed, if he could find her, he would kill both her
and her baby. Years rolled on. The old nurse died, leaving her cottage
and the few articles of furniture it contained to her poor lady,
who dwelt in it, working as a peasant for her daily bread. Her
spinning-wheel and the milk of a cow, which she had purchased with the
little money she had with her, sufficed for the scanty subsistence of
herself and her little son. There was a nice little garden attached to
the cottage, in which they cultivated peas, beans, and cabbages, and the
lady was not ashamed to go out at harvest time, and glean in the fields
to supply her little son's wants.
'Jack, that poor lady is your mother. This castle was once your
father's, and must again be yours.'
Jack uttered a cry of surprise.
'My mother! oh, madam, what ought I to do? My poor father! My dear
mother!'
'Your duty requires you to win it back for your mother. But the task
is a very difficult one, and full of peril, Jack. Have you courage to
undertake it?'
'I fear nothing when I am doing right,' said Jack.
'Then,' said the lady in the red cap, 'you are one of those who slay
giants. You must get into the castle, and if possible possess yourself
of a hen that lays golden eggs, and a harp that talks. Remember, all the
giant possesses is really yours.' As she ceased speaking, the lady of
the red hat suddenly disappeared, and of course Jack knew she was a
fairy.
Jack determined at once to attempt the adventure; so he advanced, and
blew the horn which hung at the castle portal. The door was opened in a
minute or two by a frightful giantess, with one great eye in the middle
of her forehead.
As soon as Jack saw her he turned to run away, but she caught him, and
dragged him into the castle.
'Ho, ho!' she laughed terribly. 'You didn't expect to see me here, that
is clear! No, I shan't let you go again. I am weary of my life. I am
so overworked, and I don't see why I should not have a page as well as
other ladies. And you shall be my boy. You shall clean the knives, and
black the boots, and make the fires, and help me generally when the
giant is out. When he is at home I must hide you, for he has eaten up
all my pages hitherto, and you would be a dainty morsel, my little lad.'
While she spoke she dragged Jack right into the castle. The poor boy
was very much frightened, as I am sure you and I would have been in his
place. But he remembered that fear disgraces a man; so he struggled to
be brave and make the best of things.
'I am quite ready to help you, and do all I can to serve you, madam,' he
said, 'only I beg you will be good enough to hide me from your husband,
for I should not like to be eaten at all.'
'That's a good boy,' said the Giantess, nodding her head; 'it is lucky
for you that you did not scream out when you saw me, as the other boys
who have been here did, for if you had done so my husband would have
awakened and have eaten you, as he did them, for breakfast. Come here,
child; go into my wardrobe: he never ventures to open THAT; you will be
safe there.'
And she opened a huge wardrobe which stood in the great hall, and shut
him into it. But the keyhole was so large that it ad-mitted plenty of
air, and he could see everything that took place through it. By-and-by
he heard a heavy tramp on the stairs, like the lumbering along of a
great cannon, and then a voice like thunder cried out;
     'Fe, fa, fi-fo-fum,
     I smell the breath of an Englishman.
     Let him be alive or let him be dead,
     I'll grind his bones to make my bread.'

'Wife,' cried the Giant, 'there is a man in the castle. Let me have him
for breakfast.'
'You are grown old and stupid,' cried the lady in her loud tones. 'It
is only a nice fresh steak off an elephant, that I have cooked for you,
which you smell. There, sit down and make a good breakfast.'
And she placed a huge dish before him of savoury steaming meat, which
greatly pleased him, and made him forget his idea of an Englishman being
in the castle. When he had breakfasted he went out for a walk; and then
the Giantess opened the door, and made Jack come out to help her. He
helped her all day. She fed him well, and when evening came put him back
in the wardrobe.
THE HEN THAT LAYS GOLDEN EGGS
The Giant came in to supper. Jack watched him through the keyhole, and
was amazed to see him pick a wolf's bone, and put half a fowl at a time
into his capacious mouth.
When the supper was ended he bade his wife bring him his hen that laid
the golden eggs.
'It lays as well as it did when it belonged to that paltry knight,' he
said; 'indeed I think the eggs are heavier than ever.'
The Giantess went away, and soon returned with a little brown hen, which
she placed on the table before her husband. 'And now, my dear,' she
said, 'I am going for a walk, if you don't want me any longer.'
'Go,' said the Giant; 'I shall be glad to have a nap by-and-by.'
Then he took up the brown hen and said to her:
'Lay!' And she instantly laid a golden egg.
'Lay!' said the Giant again. And she laid another.
'Lay!' he repeated the third time. And again a golden egg lay on the
table.
Now Jack was sure this hen was that of which the fairy had spoken.
By-and-by the Giant put the hen down on the floor, and soon after went
fast asleep, snoring so loud that it sounded like thunder.
Directly Jack perceived that the Giant was fast asleep, he pushed open
the door of the wardrobe and crept out; very softly he stole across the
room, and, picking up the hen, made haste to quit the apartment. He knew
the way to the kitchen, the door of which he found was left ajar; he
opened it, shut and locked it after him, and flew back to the Beanstalk,
which he descended as fast as his feet would move.
When his mother saw him enter the house she wept for joy, for she had
feared that the fairies had carried him away, or that the Giant had
found him. But Jack put the brown hen down before her, and told her how
he had been in the Giant's castle, and all his adventures. She was very
glad to see the hen, which would make them rich once more.

THE MONEY BAGS
Jack made another journey up the Beanstalk to the Giant's castle one
day while his mother had gone to market; but first he dyed his hair and
disguised himself. The old woman did not know him again, and dragged him
in as she had done before, to help her to do the work; but she heard her
husband coming, and hid him in the wardrobe, not thinking that it was
the same boy who had stolen the hen. She bade him stay quite still
there, or the Giant would eat him.
Then the Giant came in saying:
     'Fe, fa, fi-fo-fum,
     I smell the breath of an Englishman.
     Let him be alive or let him be dead,
     I'll grind his bones to make my bread.'
'Nonsense!' said the wife, 'it is only a roasted bullock that I thought
would be a tit-bit for your supper; sit down and I will bring it up
at once.' The Giant sat down, and soon his wife brought up a roasted
bullock on a large dish, and they began their supper. Jack was amazed to
see them pick the bones of the bullock as if it had been a lark. As soon
as they had finished their meal, the Giantess rose and said:
'Now, my dear, with your leave I am going up to my room to finish the
story I am reading. If you want me call for me.'
'First,' answered the Giant, 'bring me my money bags, that I may count
my golden pieces before I sleep.' The Giantess obeyed. She went and soon
returned with two large bags over her shoulders, which she put down by
her husband.
'There,' she said; 'that is all that is left of the knight's money. When
you have spent it you must go and take another baron's castle.'
'That he shan't, if I can help it,' thought Jack.
The Giant, when his wife was gone, took out heaps and heaps of golden
pieces, and counted them, and put them in piles, till he was tired of
the amusement. Then he swept them all back into their bags, and leaning
back in his chair fell fast asleep, snoring so loud that no other sound
was audible.
Jack stole softly out of the wardrobe, and taking up the bags of money
(which were his very own, because the Giant had stolen them from his
father), he ran off, and with great difficulty descending the Beanstalk,
laid the bags of gold on his mother's table. She had just returned from
town, and was crying at not finding Jack.
'There, mother, I have brought you the gold that my father lost.'
'Oh, Jack! you are a very good boy, but I wish you would not risk your
precious life in the Giant's castle. Tell me how you came to go there
again.'
And Jack told her all about it.
Jack's mother was very glad to get the money, but she did not like him
to run any risk for her.
But after a time Jack made up his mind to go again to the Giant's
castle.
THE TALKING HARP
So he climbed the Beanstalk once more, and blew the horn at the Giant's
gate. The Giantess soon opened the door; she was very stupid, and did
not know him again, but she stopped a minute before she took him in. She
feared another robbery; but Jack's fresh face looked so innocent that
she could not resist him, and so she bade him come in, and again hid him
away in the wardrobe.
By-and-by the Giant came home, and as soon as he had crossed the
threshold he roared out:
'Fe, fa, fi-fo-fum, I smell the breath of an Englishman. Let him be
alive or let him be dead, I'll grind his bones to make my bread.'

'You stupid old Giant,' said his wife, 'you only smell a nice sheep,
which I have grilled for your dinner.'
And the Giant sat down, and his wife brought up a whole sheep for his
dinner. When he had eaten it all up, he said:
'Now bring me my harp, and I will have a little music while you take
your walk.'
The Giantess obeyed, and returned with a beautiful harp. The framework
was all sparkling with diamonds and rubies, and the strings were all of
gold.
'This is one of the nicest things I took from the knight,' said the
Giant. 'I am very fond of music, and my harp is a faithful servant.'
So he drew the harp towards him, and said:
'Play!'
And the harp played a very soft, sad air.
'Play something merrier!' said the Giant.
And the harp played a merry tune.
'Now play me a lullaby,' roared the Giant; and the harp played a sweet
lullaby, to the sound of which its master fell asleep.
Then Jack stole softly out of the wardrobe, and went into the huge
kitchen to see if the Giantess had gone out; he found no one there, so
he went to the door and opened it softly, for he thought he could not do
so with the harp in his hand.
Then he entered the Giant's room and seized the harp and ran away with
it; but as he jumped over the threshold the harp called out:
'MASTER! MASTER!'
And the Giant woke up.
With a tremendous roar he sprang from his seat, and in two strides had
reached the door.
But Jack was very nimble. He fled like lightning with the harp, talking
to it as he went (for he saw it was a fairy), and telling it he was the
son of its old master, the knight.
Still the Giant came on so fast that he was quite close to poor Jack,
and had stretched out his great hand to catch him. But, luckily, just
at that moment he stepped upon a loose stone, stumbled, and fell flat on
the ground, where he lay at his full length.
This accident gave Jack time to get on the Beanstalk and hasten down it;
but just as he reached their own garden he beheld the Giant descending
after him.
'Mother I mother!' cried Jack, 'make haste and give me the axe.'
His mother ran to him with a hatchet in her hand, and Jack with one
tremendous blow cut through all the Beanstalks except one.
'Now, mother, stand out of the way!' said he.

THE GIANT BREAKS HIS NECK.

Jack's mother shrank back, and it was well she did so, for just as the
Giant took hold of the last branch of the Beanstalk, Jack cut the stem
quite through and darted from the spot.
Down came the Giant with a terrible crash, and as he fell on his head,
he broke his neck, and lay dead at the feet of the woman he had so much
injured.
Before Jack and his mother had recovered from their alarm and agitation,
a beautiful lady stood before them.
'Jack,' said she, 'you have acted like a brave knight's son, and deserve
to have your inheritance restored to you. Dig a grave and bury the
Giant, and then go and kill the Giantess.'
'But,' said Jack, 'I could not kill anyone unless I were fighting with
him; and I could not draw my sword upon a woman. Moreover, the Giantess
was very kind to me.'
The Fairy smiled on Jack.
'I am very much pleased with your generous feeling,' she said.
'Nevertheless, return to the castle, and act as you will find needful.'
Jack asked the Fairy if she would show him the way to the castle, as the
Beanstalk was now down. She told him that she would drive him there in
her chariot, which was drawn by two peacocks. Jack thanked her, and sat
down in the chariot with her.
The Fairy drove him a long distance round, till they reached a village
which lay at the bottom of the hill. Here they found a number of
miserable-looking men assembled. The Fairy stopped her carriage and
addressed them:
'My friends,' said she, 'the cruel giant who oppressed you and ate up
all your flocks and herds is dead, and this young gentleman was the
means of your being delivered from him, and is the son of your kind old
master, the knight.'
The men gave a loud cheer at these words, and pressed forward to say
that they would serve Jack as faithfully as they had served his father.
The Fairy bade them follow her to the castle, and they marched thither
in a body, and Jack blew the horn and demanded admittance.
The old Giantess saw them coming from the turret loop-hole. She was
very much frightened, for she guessed that something had happened to her
husband; and as she came downstairs very fast she caught her foot in her
dress, and fell from the top to the bottom and broke her neck.
When the people outside found that the door was not opened to them,
they took crowbars and forced the portal. Nobody was to be seen, but on
leaving the hall they found the body of the Giantess at the foot of the
stairs.
Thus Jack took possession of the castle. The Fairy went and brought his
mother to him, with the hen and the harp. He had the Giantess buried,
and endeavoured as much as lay in his power to do right to those whom
the Giant had robbed.
Before her departure for fairyland, the Fairy explained to Jack that she
had sent the butcher to meet him with the beans, in order to try what
sort of lad he was.
If you had looked at the gigantic Beanstalk and only stupidly wondered
about it,' she said, 'I should have left you where misfortune had placed
you, only restoring her cow to your mother. But you showed an inquiring
mind, and great courage and enterprise, therefore you deserve to rise;
and when you mounted the Beanstalk you climbed the Ladder of Fortune.'
She then took her leave of Jack and his mother.

THE LITTLE GOOD MOUSE
ONCE upon a time there lived a King and Queen who loved each other so
much that they were never happy unless they were together. Day after day
they went out hunting or fishing; night after night they went to balls
or to the opera; they sang, and danced, and ate sugar-plums, and were
the gayest of the gay, and all their subjects followed their example
so that the kingdom was called the Joyous Land. Now in the next kingdom
everything was as different as it could possibly be. The King was sulky
and savage, and never enjoyed himself at all. He looked so ugly and
cross that all his subjects feared him, and he hated the very sight of
a cheerful face; so if he ever caught anyone smiling he had his head
cut off that very minute. This kingdom was very appropriately called the
Land of Tears. Now when this wicked King heard of the happiness of the
Jolly King, he was so jealous that he collected a great army and set out
to fight him, and the news of his approach was soon brought to the King
and Queen. The Queen, when she heard of it, was frightened out of her
wits, and began to cry bitterly. 'Sire,' she said, 'let us collect all
our riches and run away as far as ever we can, to the other side of the
world.'
But the King answered:
'Fie, madam! I am far too brave for that. It is better to die than to be
a coward.'
Then he assembled all his armed men, and after bidding the Queen a
tender farewell, he mounted his splendid horse and rode away. When he
was lost to sight the Queen could do nothing but weep, and wring her
hands, and cry.
'Alas! If the King is killed, what will become of me and of my little
daughter?' and she was so sorrowful that she could neither eat nor
sleep.
The King sent her a letter every day, but at last, one morning, as she
looked out of the palace window, she saw a messenger approaching in hot
haste.
'What news, courier? What news?' cried the Queen, and he answered:
'The battle is lost and the King is dead, and in another moment the
enemy will be here.'
The poor Queen fell back insensible, and all her ladies carried her to
bed, and stood round her weeping and wailing. Then began a tremendous
noise and confusion, and they knew that the enemy had arrived, and very
soon they heard the King himself stamping about the palace seeking
the Queen. Then her ladies put the little Princess into her arms, and
covered her up, head and all, in the bedclothes, and ran for their
lives, and the poor Queen lay there shaking, and hoping she would not be
found. But very soon the wicked King clattered into the room, and in a
fury because the Queen would not answer when he called to her, he tore
back her silken coverings and tweaked off her lace cap, and when all
her lovely hair came tumbling down over her shoulders, he wound it three
times round his hand and threw her over his shoulder, where he carried
her like a sack of flour.
The poor Queen held her little daughter safe in her arms and shrieked
for mercy, but the wicked King only mocked her, and begged her to go on
shrieking, as it amused him, and so mounted his great black horse, and
rode back to his own country. When he got there he declared that he
would have the Queen and the little Princess hanged on the nearest tree;
but his courtiers said that seemed a pity, for when the baby grew up she
would be a very nice wife for the King's only son.
The King was rather pleased with this idea, and shut the Queen up in
the highest room of a tall tower, which was very tiny, and miserably
furnished with a table and a very hard bed upon the floor. Then he sent
for a fairy who lived near his kingdom, and after receiving her with
more politeness than he generally showed, and entertaining her at a
sumptuous feast, he took her up to see the Queen. The fairy was so
touched by the sight of her misery that when she kissed her hand she
whispered:
'Courage, madam! I think I see a way to help you.'
The Queen, a little comforted by these words, received her graciously,
and begged her to take pity upon the poor little Princess, who had met
with such a sudden reverse of fortune. But the King got very cross when
he saw them whispering together, and cried harshly:
'Make an end of these fine speeches, madam. I brought you here to tell
me if the child will grow up pretty and fortunate.'
Then the Fairy answered that the Princess would be as pretty, and
clever, and well brought up as it was possible to be, and the old King
growled to the Queen that it was lucky for her that it was so, as they
would certainly have been hanged if it were otherwise. Then he stamped
off, taking the Fairy with him, and leaving the poor Queen in tears.
'How can I wish my little daughter to grow up pretty if she is to
be married to that horrid little dwarf, the King's son,' she said to
herself, 'and yet, if she is ugly we shall both be killed. If I could
only hide her away somewhere, so that the cruel King could never find
her.'
As the days went on, the Queen and the little Princess grew thinner and
thinner, for their hard-hearted gaoler gave them every day only three
boiled peas and a tiny morsel of black bread, so they were always
terribly hungry. At last, one evening, as the Queen sat at her
spinning-wheel--for the King was so avaricious that she was made to work
day and night--she saw a tiny, pretty little mouse creep out of a hole,
and said to it:
'Alas, little creature! what are you coming to look for here? I only
have three peas for my day's provision, so unless you wish to fast you
must go elsewhere.'
But the mouse ran hither and thither, and danced and capered so
prettily, that at last the Queen gave it her last pea, which she was
keeping for her supper, saying: 'Here, little one, eat it up; I have
nothing better to offer you, but I give this willingly in return for the
amusement I have had from you.'
She had hardly spoken when she saw upon the table a delicious little
roast partridge, and two dishes of preserved fruit. 'Truly,' said she,
'a kind action never goes unrewarded; 'and she and the little Princess
ate their supper with great satisfaction, and then the Queen gave what
was left to the little mouse, who danced better than ever afterwards.
The next morning came the gaoler with the Queen's allowance of three
peas, which he brought in upon a large dish to make them look smaller;
but as soon as he set it down the little mouse came and ate up all
three, so that when the Queen wanted her dinner there was nothing left
for her. Then she was quite provoked, and said:
'What a bad little beast that mouse must be! If it goes on like this I
shall be starved.' But when she glanced at the dish again it was covered
with all sorts of nice things to eat, and the Queen made a very good
dinner, and was gayer than usual over it. But afterwards as she sat at
her spinning-wheel she began to consider what would happen if the little
Princess did not grow up pretty enough to please the King, and she said
to herself:
'Oh! if I could only think of some way of escaping.'
As she spoke she saw the little mouse playing in a corner with some long
straws. The Queen took them and began to plait them, saying:
'If only I had straws enough I would make a basket with them, and let
my baby down in it from the window to any kind passer-by who would take
care of her.'
By the time the straws were all plaited the little mouse had dragged in
more and more, until the Queen had plenty to make her basket, and
she worked at it day and night, while the little mouse danced for her
amusement; and at dinner and supper time the Queen gave it the three
peas and the bit of black bread, and always found something good in the
dish in their place. She really could not imagine where all the nice
things came from. At last one day when the basket was finished, the
Queen was looking out of the window to see how long a cord she must make
to lower it to the bottom of the tower, when she noticed a little old
woman who was leaning upon her stick and looking up at her. Presently
she said:
'I know your trouble, madam. If you like I will help you.'
'Oh! my dear friend,' said the Queen. 'If you really wish to be of use
to me you will come at the time that I will appoint, and I will let down
my poor little baby in a basket. If you will take her, and bring her up
for me, when I am rich I will reward you splendidly.'
'I don't care about the reward,' said the old woman, 'but there is one
thing I should like. You must know that I am very particular about what
I eat, and if there is one thing that I fancy above all others, it is a
plump, tender little mouse. If there is such a thing in your garret
just throw it down to me, and in return I will promise that your little
daughter shall be well taken care of.'
The Queen when she heard this began to cry, but made no answer, and the
old woman after waiting a few minutes asked her what was the matter.
'Why,' said the Queen, 'there is only one mouse in this garret, and that
is such a dear, pretty little thing that I cannot bear to think of its
being killed.'
'What!' cried the old woman, in a rage. 'Do you care more for a
miserable mouse than for your own baby? Good-bye, madam! I leave you to
enjoy its company, and for my own part I thank my stars that I can get
plenty of mice without troubling you to give them to me.'
And she hobbled off grumbling and growling. As to the Queen, she was so
disappointed that, in spite of finding a better dinner than usual,
and seeing the little mouse dancing in its merriest mood, she could do
nothing but cry. That night when her baby was fast asleep she packed it
into the basket, and wrote on a slip of paper, 'This unhappy little girl
is called Delicia!' This she pinned to its robe, and then very sadly she
was shutting the basket, when in sprang the little mouse and sat on the
baby's pillow.
'Ah! little one,' said the Queen, 'it cost me dear to save your life.
How shall I know now whether my Delicia is being taken care of or no?
Anyone else would have let the greedy old woman have you, and eat you
up, but I could not bear to do it.' Whereupon the Mouse answered:
'Believe me, madam, you will never repent of your kindness.'
The Queen was immensely astonished when the Mouse began to speak, and
still more so when she saw its little sharp nose turn to a beautiful
face, and its paws to hands and feet; then it suddenly grew tall, and
the Queen recognised the Fairy who had come with the wicked King to
visit her.
The Fairy smiled at her astonished look, and said:
'I wanted to see if you were faithful and capable of feeling a real
friendship for me, for you see we fairies are rich in everything but
friends, and those are hard to find.'
'It is not possible that YOU should want for friends, you charming
creature,' said the Queen, kissing her.
'Indeed it is so,' the Fairy said. 'For those who are only friendly with
me for their own advantage, I do not count at all. But when you cared
for the poor little mouse you could not have known there was anything to
be gained by it, and to try you further I took the form of the old woman
whom you talked to from the window, and then I was convinced that you
really loved me.' Then, turning to the little Princess, she kissed her
rosy lips three times, saying:
'Dear little one, I promise that you shall be richer than your father,
and shall live a hundred years, always pretty and happy, without fear of
old age and wrinkles.'
The Queen, quite delighted, thanked the Fairy gratefully, and begged
her to take charge of the little Delicia and bring her up as her own
daughter. This she agreed to do, and then they shut the basket and
lowered it carefully, baby and all, to the ground at the foot of the
tower. The Fairy then changed herself back into the form of a mouse,
and this delayed her a few seconds, after which she ran nimbly down the
straw rope, but only to find when she got to the bottom that the baby
had disappeared.
In the greatest terror she ran up again to the Queen, crying:
'All is lost! my enemy Cancaline has stolen the Princess away. You must
know that she is a cruel fairy who hates me, and as she is older than
I am and has more power, I can do nothing against her. I know no way of
rescuing Delicia from her clutches.'
When the Queen heard this terrible news she was heart-broken, and begged
the Fairy to do all she could to get the poor little Princess back
again. At this moment in came the gaoler, and when he missed the little
Princess he at once told the King, who came in a great fury asking what
the Queen had done with her. She answered that a fairy, whose name she
did not know, had come and carried her off by force. Upon this the King
stamped upon the ground, and cried in a terrible voice:
'You shall be hung! I always told you you should.' And without another
word he dragged the unlucky Queen out into the nearest wood, and climbed
up into a tree to look for a branch to which he could hang her. But
when he was quite high up, the Fairy, who had made herself invisible and
followed them, gave him a sudden push, which made him lose his footing
and fall to the ground with a crash and break four of his teeth, and
while he was trying to mend them the fairy carried the Queen off in her
flying chariot to a beautiful castle, where she was so kind to her that
but for the loss of Delicia the Queen would have been perfectly happy.
But though the good little mouse did her very utmost, they could not
find out where Cancaline had hidden the little Princess.
Thus fifteen years went by, and the Queen had somewhat recovered from
her grief, when the news reached her that the son of the wicked King
wished to marry the little maiden who kept the turkeys, and that she had
refused him; the wedding-dresses had been made, nevertheless, and the
festivities were to be so splendid that all the people for leagues round
were flocking in to be present at them. The Queen felt quite curious
about a little turkey-maiden who did not wish to be a Queen, so the
little mouse conveyed herself to the poultry-yard to find out what she
was like.
She found the turkey-maiden sitting upon a big stone, barefooted, and
miserably dressed in an old, coarse linen gown and cap; the ground
at her feet was all strewn with robes of gold and silver, ribbons and
laces, diamonds and pearls, over which the turkeys were stalking to
and fro, while the King's ugly, disagreeable son stood opposite her,
declaring angrily that if she would not marry him she should be killed.
The Turkey-maiden answered proudly:
'I never will marry you! you are too ugly and too much like your cruel
father. Leave me in peace with my turkeys, which I like far better than
all your fine gifts.'
The little mouse watched her with the greatest admiration, for she was
as beautiful as the spring; and as soon as the wicked Prince was gone,
she took the form of an old peasant woman and said to her:
'Good day, my pretty one! you have a fine flock of turkeys there.'
The young Turkey-maiden turned her gentle eyes upon the old woman, and
answered:
'Yet they wish me to leave them to become a miserable Queen! what is
your advice upon the matter?'
'My child,' said the Fairy, 'a crown is a very pretty thing, but you
know neither the price nor the weight of it.'
'I know so well that I have refused to wear one,' said the little
maiden, 'though I don't know who was my father, or who was my mother,
and I have not a friend in the world.'
'You have goodness and beauty, which are of more value than ten
kingdoms,' said the wise Fairy. 'But tell me, child, how came you here,
and how is it you have neither father, nor mother, nor friend?'
'A Fairy called Cancaline is the cause of my being here,' answered she,
'for while I lived with her I got nothing but blows and harsh words,
until at last I could bear it no longer, and ran away from her without
knowing where I was going, and as I came through a wood the wicked
Prince met me, and offered to give me charge of the poultry-yard. I
accepted gladly, not knowing that I should have to see him day by day.
And now he wants to marry me, but that I will never consent to.'
Upon hearing this the Fairy became convinced that the little
Turkey-maiden was none other than the Princess Delicia.
'What is your name, my little one?' said she.
'I am called Delicia, if it please you,' she answered.
Then the Fairy threw her arms round the Princess's neck, and nearly
smothered her with kisses, saying:
'Ah, Delicia! I am a very old friend of yours, and I am truly glad to
find you at last; but you might look nicer than you do in that old gown,
which is only fit for a kitchen-maid. Take this pretty dress and let us
see the difference it will make.'
So Delicia took off the ugly cap, and shook out all her fair shining
hair, and bathed her hands and face in clear water from the nearest
spring till her cheeks were like roses, and when she was adorned with
the diamonds and the splendid robe the Fairy had given her, she looked
the most beautiful Princess in the world, and the Fairy with great
delight cried:
'Now you look as you ought to look, Delicia: what do you think about it
yourself?'
And Delicia answered:
'I feel as if I were the daughter of some great king.'
'And would you be glad if you were?' said the Fairy.
'Indeed I should,' answered she.
'Ah, well,' said the Fairy, 'to-morrow I may have some pleasant news for
you.'
So she hurried back to her castle, where the Queen sat busy with her
embroidery, and cried:
'Well, madam! will you wager your thimble and your golden needle that I
am bringing you the best news you could possibly hear?'
'Alas!' sighed the Queen, 'since the death of the Jolly King and the
loss of my Delicia, all the news in the world is not worth a pin to me.
'There, there, don't be melancholy,' said the Fairy. 'I assure you the
Princess is quite well, and I have never seen her equal for beauty. She
might be a Queen to-morrow if she chose; 'and then she told all that
had happened, and the Queen first rejoiced over the thought of Delicia's
beauty, and then wept at the idea of her being a Turkey-maiden.
'I will not hear of her being made to marry the wicked King's son,' she
said. 'Let us go at once and bring her here.'
In the meantime the wicked Prince, who was very angry with Delicia, had
sat himself down under a tree, and cried and howled with rage and spite
until the King heard him, and cried out from the window:
'What is the matter with you, that you are making all this disturbance?'
The Prince replied:
'It is all because our Turkey-maiden will not love me!'
'Won't love you? eh!' said the King. 'We'll very soon see about that!'
So he called his guards and told them to go and fetch Delicia. 'See if I
don't make her change her mind pretty soon!' said the wicked King with a
chuckle.
Then the guards began to search the poultry-yard, and could find
nobody there but Delicia, who, with her splendid dress and her crown of
diamonds, looked such a lovely Princess that they hardly dared to speak
to her. But she said to them very politely:
'Pray tell me what you are looking for here?'
'Madam,' they answered, 'we are sent for an insignificant little person
called Delicia.'
'Alas!' said she, 'that is my name. What can you want with me?'
So the guards tied her hands and feet with thick ropes, for fear she
might run away, and brought her to the King, who was waiting with his
son.
When he saw her he was very much astonished at her beauty, which would
have made anyone less hard-hearted sorry for her. But the wicked King
only laughed and mocked at her, and cried: 'Well, little fright, little
toad! why don't you love my son, who is far too handsome and too good
for you? Make haste and begin to love him this instant, or you shall be
tarred and feathered.'
Then the poor little Princess, shaking with terror, went down on her
knees, crying:
'Oh, don't tar and feather me, please! It would be so uncomfortable. Let
me have two or three days to make up my mind, and then you shall do as
you like with me.'
The wicked Prince would have liked very much to see her tarred and
feathered, but the King ordered that she should be shut up in a dark
dungeon. It was just at this moment that the Queen and the Fairy arrived
in the flying chariot, and the Queen was dreadfully distressed at the
turn affairs had taken, and said miserably that she was destined to be
unfortunate all her days. But the Fairy bade her take courage.
'I'll pay them out yet,' said she, nodding her head with an air of great
determination.
That very same night, as soon as the wicked King had gone to bed, the
Fairy changed herself into the little mouse, and creeping up on to his
pillow nibbled his ear, so that he squealed out quite loudly and turned
over on his other side; but that was no good, for the little mouse only
set to work and gnawed away at the second ear until it hurt more than
the first one.
Then the King cried 'Murder!' and 'Thieves!' and all his guards ran to
see what was the matter, but they could find nothing and nobody, for
the little mouse had run off to the Prince's room and was serving him
in exactly the same way. All night long she ran from one to the other,
until at last, driven quite frantic by terror and want of sleep, the
King rushed out of the palace crying:
'Help! help! I am pursued by rats.'
The Prince when he heard this got up also, and ran after the King, and
they had not gone far when they both fell into the river and were never
heard of again.
Then the good Fairy ran to tell the Queen, and they went together to the
black dungeon where Delicia was imprisoned. The Fairy touched each door
with her wand, and it sprang open instantly, but they had to go through
forty before they came to the Princess, who was sitting on the floor
looking very dejected. But when the Queen rushed in, and kissed her
twenty times in a minute, and laughed, and cried, and told Delicia all
her history, the Princess was wild with delight. Then the Fairy showed
her all the wonderful dresses and jewels she had brought for her, and
said:
'Don't let us waste time; we must go and harangue the people.'
So she walked first, looking very serious and dignified, and wearing a
dress the train of which was at least ten ells long. Behind her came the
Queen wearing a blue velvet robe embroidered with gold, and a diamond
crown that was brighter than the sun itself. Last of all walked Delicia,
who was so beautiful that it was nothing short of marvellous.
They proceeded through the streets, returning the salutations of all
they met, great or small, and all the people turned and followed them,
wondering who these noble ladies could be.
When the audience hall was quite full, the Fairy said to the subjects of
the Wicked King that if they would accept Delicia, who was the daughter
of the Jolly King, as their Queen, she would undertake to find a
suitable husband for her, and would promise that during their reign
there should be nothing but rejoicing and merry-making, and all dismal
things should be entirely banished. Upon this the people cried with one
accord, 'We will, we will! we have been gloomy and miserable too long
already.' And they all took hands and danced round the Queen, and
Delicia, and the good Fairy, singing: 'Yes, yes; we will, we will!'
Then there were feasts and fireworks in every street in the town, and
early the next morning the Fairy, who had been all over the world in the
night, brought back with her, in her flying chariot, the most handsome
and good-tempered Prince she could find anywhere. He was so charming
that Delicia loved him from the moment their eyes met, and as for him,
of course he could not help thinking himself the luckiest Prince in
the world. The Queen felt that she had really come to the end of her
misfortunes at last, and they all lived happily ever after.(10)



