
During the whole of the week Irene had been thinking every other moment
of her promise to the old lady, although even now she could not feel
quite sure that she had not been dreaming.  Could it really be that an
old lady lived up in the top of the house, with pigeons and a
spinning-wheel, and a lamp that never went out?  She was, however, none
the less determined, on the coming Friday, to ascend the three stairs,
walk through the passages with the many doors, and try to find the
tower in which she had either seen or dreamed her grandmother.
Her nurse could not help wondering what had come to the child--she
would sit so thoughtfully silent, and even in the midst of a game with
her would so suddenly fall into a dreamy mood.  But Irene took care to
betray nothing, whatever efforts Lootie might make to get at her
thoughts.  And Lootie had to say to herself: 'What an odd child she
is!' and give it up.
At length the longed-for Friday arrived, and lest Lootie should be
moved to watch her, Irene endeavoured to keep herself as quiet as
possible.  In the afternoon she asked for her doll's house, and went on
arranging and rearranging the various rooms and their inhabitants for a
whole hour.  Then she gave a sigh and threw herself back in her chair.
One of the dolls would not sit, and another would not stand, and they
were all very tiresome.  Indeed, there was one would not even lie down,
which was too bad.  But it was now getting dark, and the darker it got
the more excited Irene became, and the more she felt it necessary to be
composed.
'I see you want your tea, princess,' said the nurse: 'I will go and get
it.  The room feels close: I will open the window a little. The evening
is mild: it won't hurt you.'
'There's no fear of that, Lootie,' said Irene, wishing she had put off
going for the tea till it was darker, when she might have made her
attempt with every advantage.
I fancy Lootie was longer in returning than she had intended; for when
Irene, who had been lost in thought, looked up, she saw it was nearly
dark, and at the same moment caught sight of a pair of eyes, bright
with a green light, glowering at her through the open window.  The next
instant something leaped into the room.  It was like a cat, with legs
as long as a horse's, Irene said, but its body no bigger and its legs
no thicker than those of a cat.  She was too frightened to cry out, but
not too frightened to jump from her chair and run from the room.
It is plain enough to every one of my readers what she ought to have
done--and indeed, Irene thought of it herself; but when she came to the
foot of the old stair, just outside the nursery door, she imagined the
creature running up those long ascents after her, and pursuing her
through the dark passages--which, after all, might lead to no tower!
That thought was too much.  Her heart failed her, and, turning from the
stair, she rushed along to the hall, whence, finding the front door
open, she darted into the court pursued--at least she thought so--by
the creature.  No one happening to see her, on she ran, unable to think
for fear, and ready to run anywhere to elude the awful creature with
the stilt-legs.  Not daring to look behind her, she rushed straight out
of the gate and up the mountain.  It was foolish indeed--thus to run
farther and farther from all who could help her, as if she had been
seeking a fit spot for the goblin creature to eat her in his leisure;
but that is the way fear serves us: it always sides with the thing we
are afraid of.
The princess was soon out of breath with running uphill; but she ran
on, for she fancied the horrible creature just behind her, forgetting
that, had it been after her such long legs as those must have overtaken
her long ago.  At last she could run no longer, and fell, unable even
to scream, by the roadside, where she lay for some time half dead with
terror.  But finding nothing lay hold of her, and her breath beginning
to come back, she ventured at length to get half up and peer anxiously
about her.  It was now so dark she could see nothing.  Not a single
star was out.  She could not even tell in what direction the house lay,
and between her and home she fancied the dreadful creature lying ready
to pounce upon her. She saw now that she ought to have run up the
stairs at once.  It was well she did not scream; for, although very few
of the goblins had come out for weeks, a stray idler or two might have
heard her. She sat down upon a stone, and nobody but one who had done
something wrong could have been more miserable.  She had quite
forgotten her promise to visit her grandmother.  A raindrop fell on her
face.  She looked up, and for a moment her terror was lost in
astonishment.  At first she thought the rising moon had left her place,
and drawn nigh to see what could be the matter with the little girl,
sitting alone, without hat or cloak, on the dark bare mountain; but she
soon saw she was mistaken, for there was no light on the ground at her
feet, and no shadow anywhere.  But a great silver globe was hanging in
the air; and as she gazed at the lovely thing, her courage revived.  If
she were but indoors again, she would fear nothing, not even the
terrible creature with the long legs!  But how was she to find her way
back?  What could that light be?  Could it be--? No, it couldn't.  But
what if it should be--yes--it must be--her great-great-grandmother's
lamp, which guided her pigeons home through the darkest night!  She
jumped up: she had but to keep that light in view and she must find the
house.  Her heart grew strong.  Speedily, yet softly, she walked down
the hill, hoping to pass the watching creature unseen.  Dark as it was,
there was little danger now of choosing the wrong road.  And--which was
most strange--the light that filled her eyes from the lamp, instead of
blinding them for a moment to the object upon which they next fell,
enabled her for a moment to see it, despite the darkness.  By looking
at the lamp and then dropping her eyes, she could see the road for a
yard or two in front of her, and this saved her from several falls, for
the road was very rough.  But all at once, to her dismay, it vanished,
and the terror of the beast, which had left her the moment she began to
return, again laid hold of her heart.  The same instant, however, she
caught the light of the windows, and knew exactly where she was.  It
was too dark to run, but she made what haste she could, and reached the
gate in safety.  She found the house door still open, ran through the
hall, and, without even looking into the nursery, bounded straight up
the stair, and the next, and the next; then turning to the right, ran
through the long avenue of silent rooms, and found her way at once to
the door at the foot of the tower stair.
When first the nurse missed her, she fancied she was playing her a
trick, and for some time took no trouble about her; but at last,
getting frightened, she had begun to search; and when the princess
entered, the whole household was hither and thither over the house,
hunting for her.  A few seconds after she reached the stair of the
tower they had even begun to search the neglected rooms, in which they
would never have thought of looking had they not already searched every
other place they could think of in vain.  But by this time she was
knocking at the old lady's door.


Woven and Then Spun
'Come in, Irene,' said the silvery voice of her grandmother.
The princess opened the door and peeped in.  But the room was quite
dark and there was no sound of the spinning-wheel.  She grew frightened
once more, thinking that, although the room was there, the old lady
might be a dream after all.  Every little girl knows how dreadful it is
to find a room empty where she thought somebody was; but Irene had to
fancy for a moment that the person she came to find was nowhere at all.
She remembered, however, that at night she spun only in the moonlight,
and concluded that must be why there was no sweet, bee-like humming:
the old lady might be somewhere in the darkness.  Before she had time
to think another thought, she heard her voice again, saying as before:
'Come in, Irene.'  From the sound, she understood at once that she was
not in the room beside her.  Perhaps she was in her bedroom.  She
turned across the passage, feeling her way to the other door.  When her
hand fell on the lock, again the old lady spoke:
'Shut the other door behind you, Irene.  I always close the door of my
workroom when I go to my chamber.'
Irene wondered to hear her voice so plainly through the door: having
shut the other, she opened it and went in.  Oh, what a lovely haven to
reach from the darkness and fear through which she had come!  The soft
light made her feel as if she were going into the heart of the milkiest
pearl; while the blue walls and their silver stars for a moment
perplexed her with the fancy that they were in reality the sky which
she had left outside a minute ago covered with rainclouds.
'I've lighted a fire for you, Irene: you're cold and wet,' said her
grandmother.
Then Irene looked again, and saw that what she had taken for a huge
bouquet of red roses on a low stand against the wall was in fact a fire
which burned in the shapes of the loveliest and reddest roses, glowing
gorgeously between the heads and wings of two cherubs of shining
silver.  And when she came nearer, she found that the smell of roses
with which the room was filled came from the fire-roses on the hearth.
Her grandmother was dressed in the loveliest pale blue velvet, over
which her hair, no longer white, but of a rich golden colour, streamed
like a cataract, here falling in dull gathered heaps, there rushing
away in smooth shining falls.  And ever as she looked, the hair seemed
pouring down from her head and vanishing in a golden mist ere it
reached the floor.  It flowed from under the edge of a circle of
shining silver, set with alternated pearls and opals.  On her dress was
no ornament whatever, neither was there a ring on her hand, or a
necklace or carcanet about her neck.  But her slippers glimmered with
the light of the Milky Way, for they were covered with seed-pearls and
opals in one mass.  Her face was that of a woman of three-and-twenty.
The princess was so bewildered with astonishment and admiration that
she could hardly thank her, and drew nigh with timidity, feeling dirty
and uncomfortable.  The lady was seated on a low chair by the side of
the fire, with hands outstretched to take her, but the princess hung
back with a troubled smile.
'Why, what's the matter?' asked her grandmother.  'You haven't been
doing anything wrong--I know that by your face, though it is rather
miserable.  What's the matter, my dear?'
And she still held out her arms.
'Dear grandmother,' said Irene, 'I'm not so sure that I haven't done
something wrong.  I ought to have run up to you at once when the
long-legged cat came in at the window, instead of running out on the
mountain and making myself such a fright.'
'You were taken by surprise, my child, and you are not so likely to do
it again.  It is when people do wrong things wilfully that they are the
more likely to do them again.  Come.'
And still she held out her arms.
'But, grandmother, you're so beautiful and grand with your crown on;
and I am so dirty with mud and rain!  I should quite spoil your
beautiful blue dress.'
With a merry little laugh the lady sprung from her chair, more lightly
far than Irene herself could, caught the child to her bosom, and,
kissing the tear-stained face over and over, sat down with her in her
lap.
'Oh, grandmother!  You'll make yourself such a mess!' cried Irene,
clinging to her.
'You darling! do you think I care more for my dress than for my little
girl?  Besides--look here.'
As she spoke she set her down, and Irene saw to her dismay that the
lovely dress was covered with the mud of her fall on the mountain road.
But the lady stooped to the fire, and taking from it, by the stalk in
her fingers, one of the burning roses, passed it once and again and a
third time over the front of her dress; and when Irene looked, not a
single stain was to be discovered.
'There!' said her grandmother, 'you won't mind coming to me now?'
But Irene again hung back, eying the flaming rose which the lady held
in her hand.
'You're not afraid of the rose--are you?' she said, about to throw it
on the hearth again.
'Oh! don't, please!' cried Irene.  'Won't you hold it to my frock and
my hands and my face?  And I'm afraid my feet and my knees want it too.'
'No, answered her grandmother, smiling a little sadly, as she threw the
rose from her; 'it is too hot for you yet.  It would set your frock in
a flame.  Besides, I don't want to make you clean tonight.
I want your nurse and the rest of the people to see you as you are, for
you will have to tell them how you ran away for fear of the long-legged
cat.  I should like to wash you, but they would not believe you then.
Do you see that bath behind you?'
The princess looked, and saw a large oval tub of silver, shining
brilliantly in the light of the wonderful lamp.
'Go and look into it,' said the lady.
Irene went, and came back very silent with her eyes shining.
'What did you see?' asked her grandmother.
'The sky, and the moon and the stars,' she answered.  'It looked as if
there was no bottom to it.'
The lady smiled a pleased satisfied smile, and was silent also for a
few moments.  Then she said:
'Any time you want a bath, come to me.  I know YOU have a bath every
morning, but sometimes you want one at night, too.'
'Thank you, grandmother; I will--I will indeed,' answered Irene, and
was again silent for some moments thinking.  Then she said: 'How was
it, grandmother, that I saw your beautiful lamp--not the light of it
only--but the great round silvery lamp itself, hanging alone in the
great open air, high up?  It was your lamp I saw--wasn't it?'
'Yes, my child--it was my lamp.'
'Then how was it?  I don't see a window all round.'
'When I please I can make the lamp shine through the walls--shine so
strong that it melts them away from before the sight, and shows itself
as you saw it.  But, as I told you, it is not everybody can see it.'
'How is it that I can, then?  I'm sure I don't know.'
'It is a gift born with you.  And one day I hope everybody will have
it.'
'But how do you make it shine through the walls?'
'Ah! that you would not understand if I were to try ever so much to
make you--not yet--not yet.  But,' added the lady, rising, 'you must
sit in my chair while I get you the present I have been preparing for
you.  I told you my spinning was for you.  It is finished now, and I am
going to fetch it.  I have been keeping it warm under one of my
brooding pigeons.'
Irene sat down in the low chair, and her grandmother left her, shutting
the door behind her.  The child sat gazing, now at the rose fire, now
at the starry walls, now at the silver light; and a great quietness
grew in her heart.  If all the long-legged cats in the world had come
rushing at her then she would not have been afraid of them for a
moment.  How this was she could not tell--she only knew there was no
fear in her, and everything was so right and safe that it could not get
in.
She had been gazing at the lovely lamp for some minutes fixedly:
turning her eyes, she found the wall had vanished, for she was looking
out on the dark cloudy night.  But though she heard the wind blowing,
none of it blew upon her.  In a moment more the clouds themselves
parted, or rather vanished like the wall, and she looked straight into
the starry herds, flashing gloriously in the dark blue.  It was but for
a moment.  The clouds gathered again and shut out the stars; the wall
gathered again and shut out the clouds; and there stood the lady beside
her with the loveliest smile on her face, and a shimmering ball in her
hand, about the size of a pigeon's egg.
'There, Irene; there is my work for you!' she said, holding out the
ball to the princess.
She took it in her hand, and looked at it all over.  It sparkled a
little, and shone here and there, but not much.  It was of a sort of
grey-whiteness, something like spun glass.
'Is this all your spinning, grandmother?' she asked.
'All since you came to the house.  There is more there than you think.'
'How pretty it is!  What am I to do with it, please?'
'That I will now explain to you,' answered the lady, turning from her
and going to her cabinet.  She came back with a small ring in her hand.
Then she took the ball from Irene's, and did something with the
ring--Irene could not tell what.
'Give me your hand,' she said.  Irene held up her right hand.
'Yes, that is the hand I want,' said the lady, and put the ring on the
forefinger of it.
'What a beautiful ring!' said Irene.  'What is the stone called?'
'It is a fire-opal.' 'Please, am I to keep it?'
'Always.' 'Oh, thank you, grandmother!  It's prettier than anything I
ever saw, except those--of all colours-in your--Please, is that your
crown?'
'Yes, it is my crown.  The stone in your ring is of the same sort--only
not so good.  It has only red, but mine have all colours, you see.'
'Yes, grandmother.  I will take such care of it!  But--' she added,
hesitating.
'But what?' asked her grandmother.
'What am I to say when Lootie asks me where I got it?'
'You will ask her where you got it,' answered the lady smiling.
'I don't see how I can do that.'
'You will, though.'
'Of course I will, if you say so.  But, you know, I can't pretend not
to know.'
'Of course not.  But don't trouble yourself about it.  You will see
when the time comes.'
So saying, the lady turned, and threw the little ball into the rose
fire.
'Oh, grandmother!' exclaimed Irene; 'I thought you had spun it for me.'
'So I did, my child.  And you've got it.'
'No; it's burnt in the fire!'
The lady put her hand in the fire, brought out the ball, glimmering as
before, and held it towards her.  Irene stretched out her hand to take
it, but the lady turned and, going to her cabinet, opened a drawer, and
laid the ball in it.
'Have I done anything to vex you, grandmother?' said Irene pitifully.
'No, my darling.  But you must understand that no one ever gives
anything to another properly and really without keeping it.  That ball
is yours.'
'Oh! I'm not to take it with me!  You are going to keep it for me!'
'You are to take it with you.  I've fastened the end of it to the ring
on your finger.'
Irene looked at the ring.
'I can't see it there, grandmother,' she said.
'Feel--a little way from the ring--towards the cabinet,' said the lady.
'Oh! I do feel it!' exclaimed the princess.  'But I can't see it,' she
added, looking close to her outstretched hand.
'No.  The thread is too fine for you to see it.  You can only feel it.
Now you can fancy how much spinning that took, although it does seem
such a little ball.'
'But what use can I make of it, if it lies in your cabinet?'
'That is what I will explain to you.  It would be of no use to you--it
wouldn't be yours at all if it did not lie in my cabinet.  Now listen.
If ever you find yourself in any danger--such, for example, as you were
in this same evening--you must take off your ring and put it under the
pillow of your bed.  Then you must lay your finger, the same that wore
the ring, upon the thread, and follow the thread wherever it leads you.'
'Oh, how delightful!  It will lead me to you, grandmother, I know!'
'Yes.  But, remember, it may seem to you a very roundabout way indeed,
and you must not doubt the thread.  Of one thing you may be sure, that
while you hold it, I hold it too.'
'It is very wonderful!' said Irene thoughtfully.  Then suddenly
becoming aware, she jumped up, crying:
'Oh, grandmother! here have I been sitting all this time in your chair,
and you standing!  I beg your pardon.'
The lady laid her hand on her shoulder, and said:
'Sit down again, Irene.  Nothing pleases me better than to see anyone
sit in my chair.  I am only too glad to stand so long as anyone will
sit in it.'
'How kind of you!' said the princess, and sat down again.
'It makes me happy,' said the lady.
'But,' said Irene, still puzzled, 'won't the thread get in somebody's
way and be broken, if the one end is fast to my ring, and the other
laid in your cabinet?'
'You will find all that arrange itself.  I am afraid it is time for you
to go.'
'Mightn't I stay and sleep with you tonight, grandmother?' 'No, not
tonight.  If I had meant you to stay tonight, I should have given you a
bath; but you know everybody in the house is miserable about you, and
it would be cruel to keep them so all night.  You must go downstairs.'
'I'm so glad, grandmother, you didn't say "Go home," for this is my
home.  Mayn't I call this my home?'
'You may, my child.  And I trust you will always think it your home.
Now come.  I must take you back without anyone seeing you.'
'Please, I want to ask you one question more,' said Irene.  'Is it
because you have your crown on that you look so young?'
'No, child,' answered her grandmother; 'it is because I felt so young
this evening that I put my crown on.  And I thought you would like to
see your old grandmother in her best.'
'Why do you call yourself old?  You're not old, grandmother.'
'I am very old indeed.  It is so silly of people--I don't mean you, for
you are such a tiny, and couldn't know better--but it is so silly of
people to fancy that old age means crookedness and witheredness and
feebleness and sticks and spectacles and rheumatism and forgetfulness!
It is so silly! Old age has nothing whatever to do with all that.  The
right old age means strength and beauty and mirth and courage and clear
eyes and strong painless limbs.  I am older than you are able to think,
and--'
'And look at you, grandmother!' cried Irene, jumping up and flinging
her arms about her neck.  'I won't be so silly again, I promise you.
At least--I'm rather afraid to promise--but if I am, I promise to be
sorry for it--I do.  I wish I were as old as you, grandmother.  I don't
think you are ever afraid of anything.'
'Not for long, at least, my child.  Perhaps by the time I am two
thousand years of age, I shall, indeed, never be afraid of anything.
But I confess I have sometimes been afraid about my children--sometimes
about you, Irene.'
'Oh, I'm so sorry, grandmother!  Tonight, I suppose, you mean.'
'Yes--a little tonight; but a good deal when you had all but made up
your mind that I was a dream, and no real great-great-grandmother.  You
must not suppose I am blaming you for that.  I dare say you could not
help it.'
'I don't know, grandmother,' said the princess, beginning to cry. 'I
can't always do myself as I should like.  And I don't always try.  I'm
very sorry anyhow.'
The lady stooped, lifted her in her arms, and sat down with her in her
chair, holding her close to her bosom.  In a few minutes the princess
had sobbed herself to sleep.  How long she slept I do not know.  When
she came to herself she was sitting in her own high chair at the
nursery table, with her doll's house before her.


The Ring
The same moment her nurse came into the room, sobbing.  When she saw
her sitting there she started back with a loud cry of amazement and
joy.  Then running to her, she caught her in her arms and covered her
with kisses.
'My precious darling princess! where have you been?  What has happened
to you?  We've all been crying our eyes out, and searching the house
from top to bottom for you.'
'Not quite from the top,' thought Irene to herself; and she might have
added, 'not quite to the bottom', perhaps, if she had known all.  But
the one she would not, and the other she could not say. 'Oh, Lootie!
I've had such a dreadful adventure!' she replied, and told her all
about the cat with the long legs, and how she ran out upon the
mountain, and came back again.  But she said nothing of her grandmother
or her lamp.
'And there we've been searching for you all over the house for more
than an hour and a half!' exclaimed the nurse.  'But that's no matter,
now we've got you!  Only, princess, I must say,' she added, her mood
changing, 'what you ought to have done was to call for your own Lootie
to come and help you, instead of running out of the house, and up the
mountain, in that wild, I must say, foolish fashion.'
'Well, Lootie,' said Irene quietly, 'perhaps if you had a big cat, all
legs, running at you, you might not exactly know what was the wisest
thing to do at the moment.'
'I wouldn't run up the mountain, anyhow,' returned Lootie.
'Not if you had time to think about it.  But when those creatures came
at you that night on the mountain, you were so frightened yourself that
you lost your way home.'
This put a stop to Lootie's reproaches.  She had been on the point of
saying that the long-legged cat must have been a twilight fancy of the
princess's, but the memory of the horrors of that night, and of the
talking-to which the king had given her in consequence, prevented her
from saying what after all she did not half believe--having a strong
suspicion that the cat was a goblin; for she knew nothing of the
difference between the goblins and their creatures: she counted them
all just goblins.
Without another word she went and got some fresh tea and bread and
butter for the princess.  Before she returned, the whole household,
headed by the housekeeper, burst into the nursery to exult over their
darling.  The gentlemen-at-arms followed, and were ready enough to
believe all she told them about the long-legged cat. Indeed, though
wise enough to say nothing about it, they remembered, with no little
horror, just such a creature amongst those they had surprised at their
gambols upon the princess's lawn.
In their own hearts they blamed themselves for not having kept better
watch.  And their captain gave orders that from this night the front
door and all the windows on the ground floor should be locked
immediately the sun set, and opened after upon no pretence whatever.
The men-at-arms redoubled their vigilance, and for some time there was
no further cause of alarm.
When the princess woke the next morning, her nurse was bending over
her.  'How your ring does glow this morning, princess!--just like a
fiery rose!' she said.
'Does it, Lootie?' returned Irene.  'Who gave me the ring, Lootie? I
know I've had it a long time, but where did I get it?  I don't
remember.'
'I think it must have been your mother gave it you, princess; but
really, for as long as you have worn it, I don't remember that ever I
heard,' answered her nurse.
'I will ask my king-papa the next time he comes,' said Irene.




