
There was to be a great battle between all the creatures of the earth
and the birds of the air. News of it went abroad, and the son of the
king of Tethertown said that when the battle was fought he would be
there to see it, and would bring back word who was to be king. But in
spite of that, he was almost too late, and every fight had been fought
save the last, which was between a snake and a great black raven. Both
struck hard, but in the end the snake proved the stronger, and would
have twisted himself round the neck of the raven till he died had not
the king's son drawn his sword, and cut off the head of the snake at a
single blow. And when the raven beheld that his enemy was dead, he was
grateful, and said:
'For thy kindness to me this day, I will show thee a sight. So come up
now on the root of my two wings.' The king's son did as he was bid, and
before the raven stopped flying, they had passed over seven bens and
seven glens and seven mountain moors.
'Do you see that house yonder?' said the raven at last. 'Go straight
for it, for a sister of mine dwells there, and she will make you right
welcome. And if she asks, "Wert thou at the battle of the birds?" answer
that thou wert, and if she asks, "Didst thou see my likeness?" answer
that thou sawest it, but be sure thou meetest me in the morning at this
place.'
The king's son followed what the raven told him and that night he had
meat of each meat, and drink of each drink, warm water for his feet, and
a soft bed to lie in.
Thus it happened the next day, and the next, but on the fourth meeting,
instead of meeting the raven, in his place the king's son found waiting
for him the handsomest youth that ever was seen, with a bundle in his
hand.
'Is there a raven hereabouts?' asked the king's son, and the youth
answered:
'I am that raven, and I was delivered by thee from the spells that bound
me, and in reward thou wilt get this bundle. Go back by the road thou
camest, and lie as before, a night in each house, but be careful not to
unloose the bundle till thou art in the place wherein thou wouldst most
wish to dwell.'
Then the king's son set out, and thus it happened as it had happened
before, till he entered a thick wood near his father's house. He had
walked a long way and suddenly the bundle seemed to grow heavier; first
he put it down under a tree, and next he thought he would look at it.
The string was easy to untie, and the king's son soon unfastened the
bundle. What was it he saw there? Why, a great castle with an orchard
all about it, and in the orchard fruit and flowers and birds of very
kind. It was all ready for him to dwell in, but instead of being in the
midst of the forest, he did wish he had left the bundle unloosed till he
had reached the green valley close to his father's palace. Well, it was
no use wishing, and with a sigh he glanced up, and beheld a huge giant
coming towards him.
'Bad is the place where thou hast built thy house, king's son,' said the
giant.
'True; it is not here that I wish to be,' answered the king's son.
'What reward wilt thou give me if I put it back in the bundle?' asked
the giant.
'What reward dost thou ask?' answered the king's son.
'The first boy thou hast when he is seven years old,' said the giant.
'If I have a boy thou shalt get him,' answered the king's son, and as he
spoke the castle and the orchard were tied up in the bundle again.
'Now take thy road, and I will take mine,' said the giant. 'And if thou
forgettest thy promise, I will remember it.'
Light of heart the king's son went on his road, till he came to the
green valley near his father's palace. Slowly he unloosed the bundle,
fearing lest he should find nothing but a heap of stones or rags. But
no! all was as it had been before, and as he opened the castle door
there stood within the most beautiful maiden that ever was seen.
'Enter, king's son,' said she, 'all is ready, and we will be married at
once,' and so they were.
The maiden proved a good wife, and the king's son, now himself a king,
was so happy that he forgot all about the giant. Seven years and a day
had gone by, when one morning, while standing on the ramparts, he beheld
the giant striding towards the castle. Then he remembered his promise,
and remembered, too, that he had told the queen nothing about it. Now he
must tell her, and perhaps she might help him in his trouble.
The queen listened in silence to his tale, and after he had finished,
she only said:
'Leave thou the matter between me and the giant,' and as she spoke, the
giant entered the hall and stood before them.
'Bring out your son,' cried he to the king, 'as you promised me seven
years and a day since.'
The king glanced at his wife, who nodded, so he answered:
'Let his mother first put him in order,' and the queen left the hall,
and took the cook's son and dressed him in the prince's clothes, and led
him up to the giant, who held his hand, and together they went out along
the road. They had not walked far when the giant stopped and stretched
out a stick to the boy.
'If your father had that stick, what would he do with it?' asked he.
'If my father had that stick, he would beat the dogs and cats that steal
the king's meat,' replied the boy.
'Thou art the cook's son!' cried the giant. 'Go home to thy mother'; and
turning his back he strode straight to the castle.
'If you seek to trick me this time, the highest stone will soon be the
lowest,' said he, and the king and queen trembled, but they could not
bear to give up their boy.
'The butler's son is the same age as ours,' whispered the queen; 'he
will not know the difference,' and she took the child and dressed him in
the prince's clothes, and the giant let him away along the road. Before
they had gone far he stopped, and held out a stick.
'If thy father had that rod, what would he do with it?' asked the giant.
'He would beat the dogs and cats that break the king's glasses,'
answered the boy.
'Thou art the son of the butler!' cried the giant. 'Go home to thy
mother'; and turning round he strode back angrily to the castle.
'Bring out thy son at once,' roared he, 'or the stone that is highest
will be lowest,' and this time the real prince was brought.
But though his parents wept bitterly and fancied the child was suffering
all kinds of dreadful things, the giant treated him like his own son,
though he never allowed him to see his daughters. The boy grew to be
a big boy, and one day the giant told him that he would have to amuse
himself alone for many hours, as he had a journey to make. So the boy
wandered to the top of the castle, where he had never been before. There
he paused, for the sound of music broke upon his ears, and opening a
door near him, he beheld a girl sitting by the window, holding a harp.
'Haste and begone, I see the giant close at hand,' she whispered
hurriedly, 'but when he is asleep, return hither, for I would speak with
thee.' And the prince did as he was bid, and when midnight struck he
crept back to the top of the castle.
'To-morrow,' said the girl, who was the giant's daughter, 'to-morrow
thou wilt get the choice of my two sisters to marry, but thou must
answer that thou wilt not take either, but only me. This will anger him
greatly, for he wishes to betroth me to the son of the king of the Green
City, whom I like not at all.'
Then they parted, and on the morrow, as the girl had said, the giant
called his three daughters to him, and likewise the young prince to whom
he spoke.
'Now, O son of the king of Tethertown, the time has come for us to part.
Choose one of my two elder daughters to wife, and thou shalt take her to
your father's house the day after the wedding.'
'Give me the youngest instead,' replied the youth, and the giant's face
darkened as he heard him.
'Three things must thou do first,' said he.
'Say on, I will do them,' replied the prince, and the giant left the
house, and bade him follow to the byre, where the cows were kept.
'For a hundred years no man has swept this byre,' said the giant, 'but
if by nightfall, when I reach home, thou has not cleaned it so that a
golden apple can roll through it from end to end, thy blood shall pay
for it.'
All day long the youth toiled, but he might as well have tried to empty
the ocean. At length, when he was so tired he could hardly move, the
giant's youngest daughter stood in the doorway.
'Lay down thy weariness,' said she, and the king's son, thinking he
could only die once, sank on the floor at her bidding, and fell sound
asleep. When he woke the girl had disappeared, and the byre was so clean
that a golden apple could roll from end to end of it. He jumped up in
surprise, and at that moment in came the giant.
'Hast thou cleaned the byre, king's son?' asked he.
'I have cleaned it,' answered he.
'Well, since thou wert so active to-day, to-morrow thou wilt thatch this
byre with a feather from every different bird, or else thy blood shall
pay for it,' and he went out.
Before the sun was up, the youth took his bow and his quiver and set off
to kill the birds. Off to the moor he went, but never a bird was to be
seen that day. At last he got so tired with running to and fro that he
gave up heart.
'There is but one death I can die,' thought he. Then at midday came the
giant's daughter.
'Thou art tired, king's son?' asked she.
'I am,' answered he; 'all these hours have I wandered, and there fell
but these two blackbirds, both of one colour.'
'Lay down thy weariness on the grass,' said she, and he did as she bade
him, and fell fast asleep.
When he woke the girl had disappeared, and he got up, and returned to
the byre. As he drew near, he rubbed his eyes hard, thinking he was
dreaming, for there it was, beautifully thatched, just as the giant had
wished. At the door of the house he met the giant.
'Hast thou thatched the byre, king's son?'
'I have thatched it.'
'Well, since thou hast been so active to-day, I have something else for
thee! Beside the loch thou seest over yonder there grows a fir tree.
On the top of the fir tree is a magpie's nest, and in the nest are five
eggs. Thou wilt bring me those eggs for breakfast, and if one is cracked
or broken, thy blood shall pay for it.'
Before it was light next day, the king's son jumped out of bed and ran
down to the loch. The tree was not hard to find, for the rising sun
shone red on the trunk, which was five hundred feet from the ground to
its first branch. Time after time he walked round it, trying to find
some knots, however small, where he could put his feet, but the bark was
quite smooth, and he soon saw that if he was to reach the top at all, it
must be by climbing up with his knees like a sailor. But then he was a
king's son and not a sailor, which made all the difference.
However, it was no use standing there staring at the fir, at least he
must try to do his best, and try he did till his hands and knees were
sore, for as soon as he had struggled up a few feet, he slid back again.
Once he climbed a little higher than before, and hope rose in his heart,
then down he came with such force that his hands and knees smarted worse
than ever.
'This is no time for stopping,' said the voice of the giant's daughter,
as he leant against the trunk to recover his breath.
'Alas! I am no sooner up than down,' answered he.
'Try once more,' said she, and she laid a finger against the tree and
bade him put his foot on it. Then she placed another finger a little
higher up, and so on till he reached the top, where the magpie had built
her nest.
'Make haste now with the nest,' she cried, 'for my father's breath is
burning my back,' and down he scrambled as fast as he could, but the
girl's little finger had caught in a branch at the top, and she was
obliged to leave it there. But she was too busy to pay heed to this, for
the sun was getting high over the hills.
'Listen to me,' she said. 'This night my two sisters and I will be
dressed in the same garments, and you will not know me. But when my
father says 'Go to thy wife, king's son,' come to the one whose right
hand has no little finger.'
So he went and gave the eggs to the giant, who nodded his head.
'Make ready for thy marriage,' cried he, 'for the wedding shall take
place this very night, and I will summon thy bride to greet thee.' Then
his three daughters were sent for, and they all entered dressed in green
silk of the same fashion, and with golden circlets round their heads.
The king's son looked from one to another. Which was the youngest?
Suddenly his eyes fell on the hand of the middle one, and there was no
little finger.
'Thou hast aimed well this time too,' said the giant, as the king's son
laid his hand on her shoulder, 'but perhaps we may meet some other way';
and though he pretended to laugh, the bride saw a gleam in his eye which
warned her of danger.
The wedding took place that very night, and the hall was filled with
giants and gentlemen, and they danced till the house shook from top to
bottom. At last everyone grew tired, and the guests went away, and the
king's son and his bride were left alone.
'If we stay here till dawn my father will kill thee,' she whispered,
'but thou art my husband and I will save thee, as I did before,' and
she cut an apple into nine pieces, and put two pieces at the head of
the bed, and two pieces at the foot, and two pieces at the door of the
kitchen, and two at the big door, and one outside the house. And when
this was done, and she heard the giant snoring, she and the king's son
crept out softly and stole across to the stable, where she led out the
blue-grey mare and jumped on its back, and her husband mounted behind
her. Not long after, the giant awoke.
 'Are you asleep?' asked he.
'Not yet,' answered the apple at the head of the bed, and the giant
turned over, and soon was snoring as loudly as before. By and bye he
called again.
'Are you asleep?'
'Not yet,' said the apple at the foot of the bed, and the giant was
satisfied. After a while, he called a third time, 'Are you asleep?'
'Not yet,' replied the apple in the kitchen, but when in a few minutes,
he put the question for the fourth time and received an answer from the
apple outside the house door, he guessed what had happened, and ran to
the room to look for himself.
The bed was cold and empty!
'My father's breath is burning my back,' cried the girl, 'put thy hand
into the ear of the mare, and whatever thou findest there, throw it
behind thee.' And in the mare's ear there was a twig of sloe tree, and
as he threw it behind him there sprung up twenty miles of thornwood so
thick that scarce a weasel could go through it. And the giant, who was
striding headlong forwards, got caught in it, and it pulled his hair and
beard.
'This is one of my daughter's tricks,' he said to himself, 'but if I had
my big axe and my wood-knife, I would not be long making a way through
this,' and off he went home and brought back the axe and the wood-knife.
It took him but a short time to cut a road through the blackthorn, and
then he laid the axe and the knife under a tree.
'I will leave them there till I return,' he murmured to himself, but a
hoodie crow, which was sitting on a branch above, heard him.
'If thou leavest them,' said the hoodie, 'we will steal them.'
'You will,' answered the giant, 'and I must take them home.' So he took
them home, and started afresh on his journey.
'My father's breath is burning my back,' cried the girl at midday. 'Put
thy finger in the mare's ear and throw behind thee whatever thou findest
in it,' and the king's son found a splinter of grey stone, and threw it
behind him, and in a twinkling twenty miles of solid rock lay between
them and the giant.
'My daughter's tricks are the hardest things that ever met me,' said
the giant, 'but if I had my lever and my crowbar, I would not be long in
making my way through this rock also,' but as he had got them, he had to
go home and fetch them. Then it took him but a short time to hew his way
through the rock.
'I will leave the tools here,' he murmured aloud when he had finished.
'If thou leavest them, we will steal them,' said a hoodie who was
perched on a stone above him, and the giant answered:
'Steal them if thou wilt; there is no time to go back.'
'My father's breath is burning my back,' cried the girl; 'look in the
mare's ear, king's son, or we are lost,' and he looked, and found a tiny
bladder full of water, which he threw behind him, and it became a
great lock. And the giant, who was striding on so fast, could not stop
himself, and he walked right into the middle and was drowned.
The blue-grey mare galloped on like the wind, and the next day the
king's son came in sight of his father's house.
'Get down and go in,' said the bride, 'and tell them that thou hast
married me. But take heed that neither man nor beast kiss thee, for then
thou wilt cease to remember me at all.'
'I will do thy bidding,' answered he, and left her at the gate. All who
met him bade him welcome, and he charged his father and mother not to
kiss him, but as he greeted them his old greyhound leapt on his neck,
and kissed him on the mouth. And after that he did not remember the
giant's daughter.
All that day she sat on a well which was near the gate, waiting,
waiting, but the king's son never came. In the darkness she climbed up
into an oak tree that shadowed the well, and there she lay all night,
waiting, waiting.
On the morrow, at midday, the wife of a shoemaker who dwelt near the
well went to draw water for her husband to drink, and she saw the shadow
of the girl in the tree, and thought it was her own shadow.
'How handsome I am, to be sure,' said she, gazing into the well, and as
she stopped to behold herself better, the jug struck against the stones
and broke in pieces, and she was forced to return to her husband without
the water, and this angered him.
'Thou hast turned crazy,' said he in wrath. 'Go thou, my daughter, and
fetch me a drink,' and the girl went, and the same thing befell her as
had befallen her mother.
'Where is the water?' asked the shoemaker, when she came back, and as
she held nothing save the handle of the jug he went to the well himself.
He too saw the reflection of the woman in the tree, but looked up to
discover whence it came, and there above him sat the most beautiful
woman in the world.
'Come down,' he said, 'for a while thou canst stay in my house,' and
glad enough the girl was to come.
Now the king of the country was about to marry, and the young men about
the court thronged the shoemaker's shop to buy fine shoes to wear at the
wedding.
'Thou hast a pretty daughter,' said they when they beheld the girl
sitting at work.
'Pretty she is,' answered the shoemaker, 'but no daughter of mine.'
'I would give a hundred pounds to marry her,' said one.
'And I,' 'And I,' cried the others.
'That is no business of mine,' answered the shoemaker, and the young men
bade him ask her if she would choose one of them for a husband, and to
tell them on the morrow. Then the shoemaker asked her, and the girl said
that she would marry the one who would bring his purse with him. So the
shoemaker hurried to the youth who had first spoken, and he came back,
and after giving the shoemaker a hundred pounds for his news, he sought
the girl, who was waiting for him.
'Is it thou?' inquired she. 'I am thirsty, give me a drink from the well
that is yonder.' And he poured out the water, but he could not move from
the place where he was; and there he stayed till many hours had passed
by.
'Take away that foolish boy,' cried the girl to the shoemaker at last,
'I am tired of him,' and then suddenly he was able to walk, and betook
himself to his home, but he did not tell the others what had happened to
him.
Next day there arrived one of the other young men, and in the evening,
when the shoemaker had gone out and they were alone, she said to him,
'See if the latch is on the door.' The young man hastened to do her
bidding, but as soon as he touched the latch, his fingers stuck to it,
and there he had to stay for many hours, till the shoemaker came back,
and the girl let him go. Hanging his head, he went home, but he told no
one what had befallen him.
Then was the turn of the third man, and his foot remained fastened to
the floor, till the girl unloosed it. And thankfully, he ran off, and
was not seen looking behind him.
'Take the purse of gold,' said the girl to the shoemaker, 'I have no
need of it, and it will better thee.' And the shoemaker took it and told
the girl he must carry the shoes for the wedding up to the castle.
'I would fain get a sight of the king's son before he marries,' sighed
she.
'Come with me, then,' answered he; 'the servants are all my friends, and
they will let you stand in the passage down which the king's son will
pass, and all the company too.'
Up they went to the castle, and when the young men saw the girl standing
there, they led her into the hall where the banquet was laid out and
poured her out some wine. She was just raising the glass to drink when a
flame went up out of it, and out of the flame sprang two pigeons, one of
gold and one of silver. They flew round and round the head of the girl,
when three grains of barley fell on the floor, and the silver pigeon
dived down, and swallowed them.
'If thou hadst remembered how I cleaned the byre, thou wouldst have
given me my share,' cooed the golden pigeon, and as he spoke three more
grains fell, and the silver pigeon ate them as before.
'If thou hadst remembered how I thatched the byre, thou wouldst have
given me my share,' cooed the golden pigeon again; and as he spoke three
more grains fell, and for the third time they were eaten by the silver
pigeon.
'If thou hadst remembered how I got the magpie's nest, thou wouldst have
given me my share,' cooed the golden pigeon.
Then the king's son understood that they had come to remind him of what
he had forgotten, and his lost memory came back, and he knew his wife,
and kissed her. But as the preparations had been made, it seemed a pity
to waste them, so they were married a second time, and sat down to the
wedding feast.


I will tell you a story about the wren. There was once a farmer who was
seeking a servant, and the wren met him and said: "What are you
seeking?"
"I am seeking a servant," said the farmer to the wren.
"Will you take me?" said the wren.
"You, you poor creature, what good would you do?"
"Try me," said the wren.
So he engaged him, and the first work he set him to do was threshing in
the barn. The wren threshed (what did he thresh with? Why a flail to be
sure), and he knocked off one grain. A mouse came out and she eats that.
"I'll trouble you not to do that again," said the wren.
He struck again, and he struck off two grains. Out came the mouse and
she eats them. So they arranged a contest to see who was strongest, and
the wren brings his twelve birds, and the mouse her tribe.
"You have your tribe with you," said the wren.
"As well as yourself," said the mouse, and she struck out her leg
proudly. But the wren broke it with his flail, and there was a pitched
battle on a set day.
When every creature and bird was gathering to battle, the son of the
king of Tethertown said that he would go to see the battle, and that he
would bring sure word home to his father the king, who would be king of
the creatures this year. The battle was over before he arrived all but
one fight, between a great black raven and a snake. The snake was
twined about the raven's neck, and the raven held the snake's throat in
his beak, and it seemed as if the snake would get the victory over the
raven. When the king's son saw this he helped the raven, and with one
blow takes the head off the snake. When the raven had taken breath, and
saw that the snake was dead, he said, "For thy kindness to me this day,
I will give thee a sight. Come up now on the root of my two wings." The
king's son put his hands about the raven before his wings, and, before
he stopped, he took him over nine Bens, and nine Glens, and nine
Mountain Moors.
"Now," said the raven, "see you that house yonder? Go now to it. It is
a sister of mine that makes her dwelling in it; and I will go bail that
you are welcome. And if she asks you, Were you at the battle of the
birds? say you were. And if she asks, 'Did you see any one like me,'
say you did, but be sure that you meet me to-morrow morning here, in
this place." The king's son got good and right good treatment that
night. Meat of each meat, drink of each drink, warm water to his feet,
and a soft bed for his limbs.
On the next day the raven gave him the same sight over six Bens, and
six Glens, and six Mountain Moors. They saw a bothy far off, but,
though far off, they were soon there. He got good treatment this night,
as before--plenty of meat and drink, and warm water to his feet, and a
soft bed to his limbs--and on the next day it was the same thing, over
three Bens and three Glens, and three Mountain Moors.
On the third morning, instead of seeing the raven as at the other
times, who should meet him but the handsomest lad he ever saw, with
gold rings in his hair, with a bundle in his hand. The king's son asked
this lad if he had seen a big black raven.
Said the lad to him, "You will never see the raven again, for I am that
raven. I was put under spells by a bad druid; it was meeting you that
loosed me, and for that you shall get this bundle. Now," said the lad,
"you must turn back on the self-same steps, and lie a night in each
house as before; but you must not loose the bundle which I gave ye,
till in the place where you would most wish to dwell."
The king's son turned his back to the lad, and his face to his father's
house; and he got lodging from the raven's sisters, just as he got it
when going forward. When he was nearing his father's house he was going
through a close wood. It seemed to him that the bundle was growing
heavy, and he thought he would look what was in it.
When he loosed the bundle he was astonished. In a twinkling he sees the
very grandest place he ever saw. A great castle, and an orchard about
the castle, in which was every kind of fruit and herb. He stood full of
wonder and regret for having loosed the bundle--for it was not in his
power to put it back again--and he would have wished this pretty place
to be in the pretty little green hollow that was opposite his father's
house; but he looked up and saw a great giant coming towards him.
"Bad's the place where you have built the house, king's son," says the
giant.
"Yes, but it is not here I would wish it to be, though it happens to be
here by mishap," says the king's son.
"What's the reward for putting it back in the bundle as it was before?"
"What's the reward you would ask?" says the king's son.
"That you will give me the first son you have when he is seven years of
age," says the giant.
"If I have a son you shall have him," said the king's son.
In a twinkling the giant put each garden, and orchard, and castle in
the bundle as they were before.
"Now," says the giant, "take your own road, and I will take mine; but
mind your promise, and if you forget I will remember."
The king's son took to the road, and at the end of a few days he
reached the place he was fondest of. He loosed the bundle, and the
castle was just as it was before. And when he opened the castle door he
sees the handsomest maiden he ever cast eye upon.
"Advance, king's son," said the pretty maid; "everything is in order
for you, if you will marry me this very day."
"It's I that am willing," said the king's son. And on the same day they
married.
But at the end of a day and seven years, who should be seen coming to
the castle but the giant. The king's son was reminded of his promise to
the giant, and till now he had not told his promise to the queen.
"Leave the matter between me and the giant," says the queen.
"Turn out your son," says the giant; "mind your promise."
"You shall have him," says the king, "when his mother puts him in order
for his journey."
The queen dressed up the cook's son, and she gave him to the giant by
the hand. The giant went away with him; but he had not gone far when he
put a rod in the hand of the little laddie. The giant asked him--
"If thy father had that rod what would he do with it?"
"If my father had that rod he would beat the dogs and the cats, so that
they shouldn't be going near the king's meat," said the little laddie.
"Thou'rt the cook's son," said the giant. He catches him by the two
small ankles and knocks him against the stone that was beside him. The
giant turned back to the castle in rage and madness, and he said that
if they did not send out the king's son to him, the highest stone of
the castle would be the lowest.
Said the queen to the king, "We'll try it yet; the butler's son is of
the same age as our son."
She dressed up the butler's son, and she gives him to the giant by the
hand. The giant had not gone far when he put the rod in his hand.
"If thy father had that rod," says the giant, "what would he do with
it?"
"He would beat the dogs and the cats when they would be coming near the
king's bottles and glasses."
"Thou art the son of the butler," says the giant and dashed his brains
out too. The giant returned in a very great rage and anger. The earth
shook under the sole of his feet, and the castle shook and all that was
in it.
"OUT HERE WITH THY SON," says the giant, "or in a twinkling the stone
that is highest in the dwelling will be the lowest." So they had to
give the king's son to the giant.
When they were gone a little bit from the earth, the giant showed him
the rod that was in his hand and said: "What would thy father do with
this rod if he had it?"
The king's son said: "My father has a braver rod than that."
And the giant asked him, "Where is thy father when he has that brave
rod?"
And the king's son said: "He will be sitting in his kingly chair."
Then the giant understood that he had the right one.
The giant took him to his own house, and he reared him as his own son.
On a day of days when the giant was from home, the lad heard the
sweetest music he ever heard in a room at the top of the giant's house.
At a glance he saw the finest face he had ever seen. She beckoned to
him to come a bit nearer to her, and she said her name was Auburn Mary
but she told him to go this time, but to be sure to be at the same
place about that dead midnight.
And as he promised he did. The giant's daughter was at his side in a
twinkling, and she said, "To-morrow you will get the choice of my two
sisters to marry; but say that you will not take either, but me. My
father wants me to marry the son of the king of the Green City, but I
don't like him." On the morrow the giant took out his three daughters,
and he said:
"Now, son of the king of Tethertown, thou hast not lost by living with
me so long. Thou wilt get to wife one of the two eldest of my
daughters, and with her leave to go home with her the day after the
wedding."
"If you will give me this pretty little one," says the king's son, "I
will take you at your word."
The giant's wrath kindled, and he said: "Before thou gett'st her thou
must do the three things that I ask thee to do."
"Say on," says the king's son.
The giant took him to the byre.
"Now," says the giant, "a hundred cattle are stabled here, and it has
not been cleansed for seven years. I am going from home to-day, and if
this byre is not cleaned before night comes, so clean that a golden
apple will run from end to end of it, not only thou shalt not get my
daughter, but 'tis only a drink of thy fresh, goodly, beautiful blood
that will quench my thirst this night."
He begins cleaning the byre, but he might just as well to keep baling
the great ocean. After midday when sweat was blinding him, the giant's
youngest daughter came where he was, and she said to him:
"You are being punished, king's son."
"I am that," says the king's son.
"Come over," says Auburn Mary, "and lay down your weariness."
"I will do that," says he, "there is but death awaiting me, at any
rate." He sat down near her. He was so tired that he fell asleep beside
her. When he awoke, the giant's daughter was not to be seen, but the
byre was so well cleaned that a golden apple would run from end to end
of it and raise no stain. In comes the giant, and he said:
"Hast thou cleaned the byre, king's son?"
"I have cleaned it," says he.
"Somebody cleaned it," says the giant.
"You did not clean it, at all events," said the king's son.
"Well, well!" says the giant, "since thou wert so active to-day, thou
wilt get to this time to-morrow to thatch this byre with birds' down,
from birds with no two feathers of one colour."
The king's son was on foot before the sun; he caught up his bow and his
quiver of arrows to kill the birds. He took to the moors, but if he
did, the birds were not so easy to take. He was running after them till
the sweat was blinding him. About mid-day who should come but Auburn
Mary.
"You are exhausting yourself, king's son," says she.
"I am," said he.
"There fell but these two blackbirds, and both of one colour."
"Come over and lay down your weariness on this pretty hillock," says
the giant's daughter.
"It's I am willing," said he.
He thought she would aid him this time, too, and he sat down near her,
and he was not long there till he fell asleep.
When he awoke, Auburn Mary was gone. He thought he would go back to the
house, and he sees the byre thatched with feathers. When the giant came
home, he said:
"Hast thou thatched the byre, king's son?"
"I thatched it," says he.
"Somebody thatched it," says the giant.
"You did not thatch it," says the king's son.
"Yes, yes!" says the giant. "Now," says the giant, "there is a fir tree
beside that loch down there, and there is a magpie's nest in its top.
The eggs thou wilt find in the nest. I must have them for my first
meal. Not one must be burst or broken, and there are five in the nest."
Early in the morning the king's son went where the tree was, and that
tree was not hard to hit upon. Its match was not in the whole wood.
From the foot to the first branch was five hundred feet. The king's son
was going all round the tree. She came who was always bringing help to
him.
"You are losing the skin of your hands and feet."
"Ach! I am," says he. "I am no sooner up than down."
"This is no time for stopping," says the giant's daughter. "Now you
must kill me, strip the flesh from my bones, take all those bones
apart, and use them as steps for climbing the tree. When you are
climbing the tree, they will stick to the glass as if they had grown
out of it; but when you are coming down, and have put your foot on each
one, they will drop into your hand when you touch them. Be sure and
stand on each bone, leave none untouched; if you do, it will stay
behind. Put all my flesh into this clean cloth by the side of the
spring at the roots of the tree. When you come to the earth, arrange my
bones together, put the flesh over them, sprinkle it with water from
the spring, and I shall be alive before you. But don't forget a bone of
me on the tree."
"How could I kill you," asked the king's son, "after what you have done
for me?"
"If you won't obey, you and I are done for," said Auburn Mary. "You
must climb the tree, or we are lost; and to climb the tree you must do
as I say."  The king's son obeyed. He killed Auburn Mary, cut the flesh
from her body, and unjointed the bones, as she had told him.
As he went up, the king's son put the bones of Auburn Mary's body
against the side of the tree, using them as steps, till he came under
the nest and stood on the last bone.
Then he took the eggs, and coming down, put his foot on every bone,
then took it with him, till he came to the last bone, which was so near
the ground that he failed to touch it with his foot.
He now placed all the bones of Auburn Mary in order again at the side
of the spring, put the flesh on them, sprinkled it with water from the
spring. She rose up before him, and said: "Didn't I tell you not to
leave a bone of my body without stepping on it? Now I am lame for life!
You left my little finger on the tree without touching it, and I have
but nine fingers."
"Now," says she, "go home with the eggs quickly, and you will get me to
marry to-night if you can know me. I and my two sisters will be arrayed
in the same garments, and made like each other, but look at me when my
father says, 'Go to thy wife, king's son;' and you will see a hand
without a little finger."
He gave the eggs to the giant.
"Yes, yes!" says the giant, "be making ready for your marriage."
Then, indeed, there was a wedding, and it _was_ a wedding! Giants and
gentlemen, and the son of the king of the Green City was in the midst
of them. They were married, and the dancing began, that was a dance!
The giant's house was shaking from top to bottom.
But bed time came, and the giant said, "It is time for thee to go to
rest, son of the king of Tethertown; choose thy bride to take with thee
from amidst those."
She put out the hand off which the little finger was, and he caught her
by the hand.
"Thou hast aimed well this time too; but there is no knowing but we may
meet thee another way," said the giant.
But to rest they went. "Now," says she, "sleep not, or else you are a
dead man. We must fly quick, quick, or for certain my father will kill
you."
Out they went, and on the blue grey filly in the stable they mounted.
"Stop a while," says she, "and I will play a trick to the old hero."
She jumped in, and cut an apple into nine shares, and she put two
shares at the head of the bed, and two shares at the foot of the bed,
and two shares at the door of the kitchen, and two shares at the big
door, and one outside the house.
The giant awoke and called, "Are you asleep?"
"Not yet," said the apple that was at the head of the bed.
At the end of a while he called again.
"Not yet," said the apple that was at the foot of the bed.
A while after this he called again: "Are your asleep?"
"Not yet," said the apple at the kitchen door.
The giant called again.
The apple that was at the big door answered.
"You are now going far from me," says the giant.
"Not yet," says the apple that was outside the house.
"You are flying," says the giant. The giant jumped on his feet, and to
the bed he went, but it was cold--empty.
"My own daughter's tricks are trying me," said the giant. "Here's after
them," says he.
At the mouth of day, the giant's daughter said that her father's breath
was burning her back.
"Put your hand, quick," said she, "in the ear of the grey filly, and
whatever you find in it, throw it behind us."
"There is a twig of sloe tree," said he.
"Throw it behind us," said she.
No sooner did he that, than there were twenty miles of blackthorn wood,
so thick that scarce a weasel could go through it.
The giant came headlong, and there he is fleecing his head and neck in
the thorns.
"My own daughter's tricks are here as before," said the giant; "but if
I had my own big axe and wood knife here, I would not be long making a
way through this."
He went home for the big axe and the wood knife, and sure he was not
long on his journey, and he was the boy behind the big axe. He was not
long making a way through the blackthorn.
"I will leave the axe and the wood knife here till I return," says he.
"If you leave 'em, leave 'em," said a hoodie that was in a tree, "we'll
steal 'em, steal 'em."
"If you will do that," says the giant, "I must take them home." He
returned home and left them at the house.
At the heat of day the giant's daughter felt her father's breath
burning her back.
"Put your finger in the filly's ear, and throw behind whatever you find
in it."
He got a splinter of grey stone, and in a twinkling there were twenty
miles, by breadth and height, of great grey rock behind them.
The giant came full pelt, but past the rock he could not go.
"The tricks of my own daughter are the hardest things that ever met
me," says the giant; "but if I had my lever and my mighty mattock, I
would not be long in making my way through this rock also."
There was no help for it, but to turn the chase for them; and he was
the boy to split the stones. He was not long in making a road through
the rock.
"I will leave the tools here, and I will return no more."
"If you leave 'em, leave 'em," says the hoodie, "we will steal 'em,
steal 'em."
"Do that if you will; there is no time to go back."
At the time of breaking the watch, the giant's daughter said that she
felt her father's breath burning her back.
"Look in the filly's ear, king's son, or else we are lost."
He did so, and it was a bladder of water that was in her ear this time.
He threw it behind him and there was a fresh-water loch, twenty miles
in length and breadth, behind them.
The giant came on, but with the speed he had on him, he was in the
middle of the loch, and he went under, and he rose no more.
On the next day the young companions were come in sight of his father's
house. "Now," says she, "my father is drowned, and he won't trouble us
any more; but before we go further," says she, "go you to your father's
house, and tell that you have the likes of me; but let neither man nor
creature kiss you, for if you do, you will not remember that you have
ever seen me."
Every one he met gave him welcome and luck, and he charged his father
and mother not to kiss him; but as mishap was to be, an old greyhound
was indoors, and she knew him, and jumped up to his mouth, and after
that he did not remember the giant's daughter.
She was sitting at the well's side as he left her, but the king's son
was not coming. In the mouth of night she climbed up into a tree of oak
that was beside the well, and she lay in the fork of that tree all
night. A shoemaker had a house near the well, and about mid-day on the
morrow, the shoemaker asked his wife to go for a drink for him out of
the well. When the shoemaker's wife reached the well, and when she saw
the shadow of her that was in the tree, thinking it was her own
shadow--and she never thought till now that she was so handsome--she
gave a cast to the dish that was in her hand, and it was broken on the
ground, and she took herself to the house without vessel or water.
"Where is the water, wife?" said the shoemaker.
"You shambling, contemptible old carle, without grace, I have stayed
too long your water and wood thrall."
"I think, wife, that you have turned crazy. Go you, daughter, quickly,
and fetch a drink for your father."
His daughter went, and in the same way so it happened to her. She never
thought till now that she was so lovable, and she took herself home.
"Up with the drink," said her father.
"You home-spun shoe carle, do you think I am fit to be your thrall?"
The poor shoemaker thought that they had taken a turn in their
understandings, and he went himself to the well. He saw the shadow of
the maiden in the well, and he looked up to the tree, and he sees the
finest woman he ever saw.
"Your seat is wavering, but your face is fair," said the shoemaker.
"Come down, for there is need of you for a short while at my house."
The shoemaker understood that this was the shadow that had driven his
people mad. The shoemaker took her to his house, and he said that he
had but a poor bothy, but that she should get a share of all that was
in it.
One day, the shoemaker had shoes ready, for on that very day the king's
son was to be married. The shoemaker was going to the castle with the
shoes of the young people, and the girl said to the shoemaker, "I would
like to get a sight of the king's son before he marries."
"Come with me," says the shoemaker, "I am well acquainted with the
servants at the castle, and you shall get a sight of the king's son and
all the company."
And when the gentles saw the pretty woman that was here they took her
to the wedding-room, and they filled for her a glass of wine. When she
was going to drink what is in it, a flame went up out of the glass, and
a golden pigeon and a silver pigeon sprang out of it. They were flying
about when three grains of barley fell on the floor. The silver pigeon
sprung, and ate that up.
Said the golden pigeon to him, "If you remembered when I cleared the
byre, you would not eat that without giving me a share."
Again there fell three other grains of barley, and the silver pigeon
sprung, and ate that up as before.
"If you remembered when I thatched the byre, you would not eat that
without giving me my share," says the golden pigeon.
Three other grains fall, and the silver pigeon sprung, and ate that up.
"If you remembered when I harried the magpie's nest, you would not eat
that without giving me my share," says the golden pigeon; "I lost my
little finger bringing it down, and I want it still."
The king's son minded, and he knew who it was that was before him.
"Well," said the king's son to the guests at the feast, "when I was a
little younger than I am now, I lost the key of a casket that I had. I
had a new key made, but after it was brought to me I found the old one.
Now, I'll leave it to any one here to tell me what I am to do. Which of
the keys should I keep?"
"My advice to you," said one of the guests, "is to keep the old key,
for it fits the lock better and you're more used to it."
Then the king's son stood up and said: "I thank you for a wise advice
and an honest word. This is my bride the daughter of the giant who
saved my life at the risk of her own. I'll have her and no other woman."
So the king's son married Auburn Mary and the wedding lasted long and
all were happy. But all I got was butter on a live coal, porridge in a
basket, and they sent me for water to the stream, and the paper shoes
came to an end.





