
There was a woman in Connemara, the wife of a fisherman; as he had
always good luck, she had plenty of fish at all times stored away in the
house ready for market. But, to her great annoyance, she found that a
great cat used to come in at night and devour all the best and finest
fish. So she kept a big stick by her, and determined to watch.
One day, as she and a woman were spinning together, the house suddenly
became quite dark; and the door was burst open as if by the blast of the
tempest, when in walked a huge black cat, who went straight up to the
fire, then turned round and growled at them.
"Why, surely this is the devil," said a young girl who was by, sorting
fish.
"I'll teach you to call me names," said the cat; and, jumping at her, he
scratched her arm till the blood came. "There, now," he said, "you will
be more civil another time when a gentleman comes to see you." And, with
that, he walked over to the door, and shut it close to prevent any of
them going out, for the poor young girl, while crying loudly from fright
and pain, had made a desperate rush to get away.
Just then a man was going by, and, hearing the cries, he pushed open the
door, and tried to get in; but the cat stood on the threshold and would
let no one pass. On this the man attacked him with a stick, and gave him
a sound blow; the cat, however, was more than a match in the fight, for
it flew at him, and tore his face and hands so badly that the man at
last took to his heels, and ran away as fast as he could.
"Now, it's time for my dinner," said the cat, going up to examine the
fish that was laid out on the tables. "I hope the fish is good to-day.
Now, don't disturb me, or make a fuss; I can help myself." With that, he
jumped up, and began to devour all the best fish, while he growled at
the woman.
"Away out of this, you wicked beast!" she cried, giving it a blow with
the tongs that would have broken its back, only it was a devil; "out of
this; no fish shall you have to-day!"
But the cat only grinned at her, and went on tearing and despoiling and
devouring the fish, evidently not a bit the worse for the blows. On
this both the women attacked it with sticks, and struck hard blows
enough to kill it, on which the cat glared at them and spit fire; then,
making a leap, it tore their heads and arms till the blood came, and the
frightened women rushed shrieking from the house.
But presently the mistress of the house returned, carrying with her a
bottle of holy water; and, looking in, she saw the cat still devouring
the fish, and not minding. So she crept over quietly, and threw holy
water on it without a word. No sooner was this done than a dense, black
smoke filled the place, through which nothing was seen but the two red
eyes of the cat burning like coals of fire. Then the smoke gradually
cleared away, and she saw the body of the creature burning slowly, till
it became shrivelled and black like a cinder, and finally disappeared.
And from that time the fish remained untouched and safe from harm, for
the power of the Evil One was broken, and the Demon Cat was seen no
more.


