

"Win victory and blessings, O Fionn," said Conan, "and tell me who was
the man that, having only one leg, one arm, and one eye, escaped from
you in consequence of his swiftness, and outstripped the Fenians of
Eire, and why is this proverb used, 'As Roc came to the house of
Fionn'?"
"I will tell you that," said Fionn. "One day the chief of the Fenians
and I went to Teamhair Luachra, and we took nothing in the chase that
same day but one fawn. When it had been cooked it was fetched to me for
the purpose of dividing it. I gave a portion of it to each of the Fenian
chiefs, and there remained none for my own share but a haunch bone.
Gobha Gaoithe, son of Ronan, presented himself, and requested me to
give him the haunch. I accordingly gave it to him. He then declared that
I gave him that portion on account of his swiftness of foot: and he went
out on the plain, but he had only gone a short distance when Caoilte,
son of Ronan, his own brother, overtook him, and brought the haunch back
again to me, and we had no further dispute about the matter. We had not
been long so when we saw a huge, obnoxious, massy-boned, black,
detestable giant, having only one eye, one arm, and one leg, hop forward
towards us. He saluted us. I returned the salutation, and asked him
whence he came. 'I am come by the powers of the agility of my arm and
leg,' responded he, 'having heard there is not one man in the world more
liberal in bestowing gifts than you, O Fionn; therefore, I am come to
solicit wealth and valuable gifts from you.' I replied that were all the
wealth of the world mine I would give him neither little nor much. He
then declared 'they were all liars who asserted that I never gave a
refusal to any person.' I replied that if he were a man I would not give
him a refusal. 'Well, then,' said the giant, 'let me have that haunch
you have in your hand, and I will say good-bye to the Fenians, provided
that you allow me the length of the haunch as a distance, and that I am
not seized upon until I make my first hop.' Upon hearing this I gave the
haunch into the giant's hand, and he hopped over the lofty stockades of
the town; he then made use of the utmost swiftness of his one leg to
outstrip all the rest of the Fenians. When the Fenian chiefs saw that,
they started in pursuit of the giant, while I and the band of minstrels
of the town went to the top of the dun to watch their proceedings. When
I saw that the giant had outstripped them a considerable distance, I put
on my running habiliments, and, taking no weapon but Mac an Loin in my
hand, I started after the others. I overtook the hindmost division on
Sliabh an Righ, the middle (next) division at Limerick, and the chiefs
of the Fenians at Ath Bo, which is called Ath-Luain (Athlone), and those
first in the pursuit at Rinn-an-Ruaigh, to the right-hand side of
Cruachan of Connacht, where he (the giant) was distant less than a
javelin's cast from me. The giant passed on before me and crossed Eas
Roe (now Ballyshannon), of the son of Modhuirn, without wetting his
foot. I leaped over it after him. He then directed his course towards
the estuary of Binn-Edair, keeping the circuit of Eire to his right
hand. The giant leaped over the estuary, and it was a leap similar to
flight over the sea. I sprang after him, and having caught him by the
small of the back, laid him prostrate on the earth. 'You have dealt
unjustly by me, O Fionn,' cried the giant; 'for it was not with you I
arranged the combat, but with the Fenians.' I replied that the Fenians
were not perfect, except I myself were with them. We had not remained
long thus when Liagan Luaimneach, from Luachar Deaghaidh, came to us. He
was followed by Caoilte Mac Ronan, together with the swiftest of the
Fenians. Each of them couched his javelin, intending to drive it through
the giant and kill him in my arms, but I protected him from their
attacks. Soon after this the main body of the Fenians arrived; they
enquired what was the cause of the delay that the giant had not been
slain. 'That is bad counsel,' said the giant, 'for a better man than I
am would be slain in my eric.' We bound the giant strongly on that
occasion; and soon after Bran Beag O'Buadhchan came to invite me to a
feast, and all the Fenians of Eire, who had been present, accompanied
him to his house. The banqueting hall had been prepared for our
reception at that time, and the giant was dragged into the middle of the
house, and was there placed in the sight of all present. They asked him
who he was. 'Roc, son of Diocan, is my name,' replied he, 'that is, I am
son to the Legislator of Aengus of the Brugh in the south. My betrothed
poured a current of surprising affection and a torrent of deep love upon
Sgiath Breac, son of Dathcaoin yonder, who is your foster son, O Fionn;
it hurt my feelings severely to hear her boast of the swiftness and
bravery of her lover in particular, and of the Fenians in general, and I
declared that I would challenge him and all the Fenians of Eire to run a
race with me; but she sneered at me. I then went to my beloved friend,
Aengus of the Brugh, to bemoan my fate; and he metamorphosed me thus,
and bestowed on me the swiftness of a druidical wind, as you have seen.
This is my history for you; and you ought to be well satisfied with all
the hurt and injury you have inflicted upon me already.'
"Then I repented me of the indignity put upon the giant, and I released
him from his bonds and I bade Liagan Luaimneach companion him to the
presence of his betrothed one and testify to her on my behalf of his
prowess in the race, wherein he had outstripped all the Fenians of Eire,
save only myself. So the two went forth together in friendly amity, and
Roc, for the champion feat reported of him by Liagan Luaimneach,
recovered the affection of his betrothed, and straightway took her to
wife. From that adventure, indeed, arose the proverb, 'As Roc came to
the House of Fionn,' and so that is the answer to your question, O
Conan," said Fionn.
"Win victory and blessings, O Fenian King," said Conan; "it is with
clear memory and sweet words you relate these things. Tell me now the
meaning of the byword, 'The hospitality of Fionn in the house of
Cuanna.'"
"I will tell you the truth concerning that, O Conan," said Fionn.
"Oisin, Caoilte, Mac Lughaidh, Diarmuid O'Duibhne, and myself happened
one day, above all other days, to be on the summit of Cairn Feargall. We
were accompanied by our five hounds, namely, Bran, Sceoluing, Sear Dubh,
Luath Luachar, and Anuaill. We had not long been there when we perceived
a rough, tall, huge giant approaching us. He carried an iron fork upon
his back, and a grunting hog was placed between the prongs of the fork;
a young girl of mature age followed and forced the giant on his way
before her. 'Let someone go forward and accost those people,' said I.
Diarmuid O'Duibhne followed, but did not overtake them. The other three
and I started up, and followed Diarmuid and the giant. We overtook
Diarmuid, but did not come up with the giant or the girl; for a dark,
gloomy, druidical mist showered down between us and them, so that we
could not discern what road they took. When the mist cleared away we
looked around us, and discovered a light-roofed, comfortable-looking
house at the edge of the ford near at hand. We proceeded to the house,
before which spread a lawn upon which were two fountains. At the brink
of one fountain lay a rude iron vessel, and a vessel of bronze at the
brink of the other. Those we met in the house were an aged, hoary-headed
man standing by the door jamb to the right hand, and a beautiful maid
sitting before him; a rough, rude, huge giant before the fire busily
cooking a hog; and an old man at the other side of the fire, having an
iron-grey head of hair and twelve eyes in his head, while the twelve
sons (germs) of discord beamed in each eye. There was also in the house
a ram with a white belly, a jet-black head, dark-green horns, and green
feet; and there was in the end of the house a hag covered with a dark
ash-coloured garment. There were no persons in the house except these.
The man at the door-post welcomed us; and we five, having our five
hounds with us, sat on the floor of the bruighean. 'Let submissive
homage be done to Fionn Mac Cumhaill and his people,' said the man at
the door-post. 'My case is that of a man begging a request, but
obtaining neither the smaller nor the greater part of it,' said the
giant. Nevertheless, he rose up and did respectful homage to us. After a
while I became suddenly thirsty, and no person present perceived it but
Caoilte, who began to complain bitterly on that account. 'You have no
cause to complain, Caoilte,' said the man of the door-post, 'but only to
step outside and fetch a drink for Fionn from whichever of the fountains
you please.' Caoilte did so, and fetched the bronze vessel brimful to me
and gave me to drink. I took a drink from it, and the water tasted like
honey while I was drinking, but bitter as gall when I put the vessel
from my lips; so that darting pains and symptoms of death seized me and
agonising pangs from the poisonous draught. I could be but with
difficulty recognised; and the lamentation of Caoilte on account of my
being in that condition was greater than that he had before given vent
to on account of my thirst. The man at the door-post desired Caoilte to
go out and bring me a drink from the other fountain. Caoilte obeyed,
and brought me the iron vessel brimful. I never underwent so much
hardship in battle or conflict as I then suffered while drinking, in
consequence of the bitterness of the draught; but as soon as I put the
vessel from my lips I recovered my own colour and appearance, and that
gave joy and happiness to my people.
"The man then asked if the hog which was in the boiler was yet cooked.
'It is cooked,' replied the giant, 'and allow me to divide it.' 'How
will you divide it?' said the man of the house. 'I will give one
hindquarter to Fionn and his hounds; the other hindquarter to Fionn's
four men; the forepart to myself; the chine and rump to the old man who
sits at the opposite side of the fire and to the hag in yonder corner;
and the giblets to you and the young woman who is opposite to you.' 'I
pledge my word,' said the man of the house, 'you have divided it very
fairly.' 'I pledge my word,' exclaimed the ram, 'that the division is
very unfair so far as I am concerned, for I have been altogether
forgotten.' And so saying, he immediately snatched the quarter that lay
before my four men, and carried it away into a corner, where he began to
devour it. The four men instantly attacked the ram all at once with
their swords, but though they laid on violently, it did not affect him
in the least, and the blows fell away as from a stone or rock, so that
they were forced to resume their seats. 'Upon my veracity, he is doomed
for evil who owns as companions such four fellows as you are, who tamely
suffer one single sheep to carry away your food and devour it before
your faces,' exclaimed the man with the twelve eyes; and at the same
time going up to the ram, he caught him by the feet and gave him a
violent pitch out of the door, so that he fell on his back on the
ground; and from that time we saw him no more. Soon after this the hag
started up, and having thrown her ashy-grey coverlet over my four men,
metamorphosed them into four withered, drooping-headed old men. When I
saw that I was seized with great fear and alarm; and when the man at the
door-post perceived this, he desired me to come over to him, place my
head on his bosom, and sleep. I did so; and the hag got up and took her
coverlet off my four men; and when I awoke I found them restored to
their own shape, and that was a great happiness to me. 'O Fionn,' asked
the man of the door-post, 'do you feel surprised at the appearance and
arrangements of this house?' I assured him that I never saw anything
which surprised me more. 'Well, then, I will explain the meaning of all
these things to you,' said the man. 'The giant carrying the grunting hog
between the prongs of the iron fork, whom you first saw, is he who is
yonder, and his name is SLOTH. She who is close to me is the young woman
who had been forcing him along, that is ENERGY; and ENERGY compels SLOTH
forward with her; for ENERGY moves, in the twinkling of the eye, a
greater distance than the foot can travel in a year. The old man of the
bright eyes yonder signifies the WORLD; and he is more powerful than
anyone, which has been proved by his rendering the ram powerless. That
ram which you saw signifies the CRIMES of the man. That hag there beyond
is withering OLD AGE, and her clothing has withered your four men. The
two wells from which you drank the two draughts mean FALSEHOOD and
TRUTH; for while telling a lie one finds it sweet, but it becomes bitter
at the last. Cuanna from Innistuil is my own name. I do not reside here,
but having conceived a wonderful love for you, O Fionn, on account of
your superiority in wisdom and general celebrity, I therefore put those
things into the way before you in order that I might see you. And this
story shall be called, to the end of the world, the Hospitality of
Cuanna's House to Fionn. Let you and your men come together, and do ye
five sleep until morning.' Accordingly we did so, and when we awoke in
the morning we found ourselves on the summit of Cairn Feargaill, with
our hounds and arms by us. So there is the meaning of the byword, 'The
hospitality of Fionn in the house of Cuanna,' O Conan," said Fionn.


The White Trout


"There was wanst upon a time, long ago, a beautiful young lady that
lived in a castle up by the lake beyant, and they say she was promised
to a king's son, and they wor to be married, when, all of a suddent, he
was murthered, the crathur (Lord help us!) and threwn in the lake abou,
and so, of coorse, he couldn't keep his promise to the fair lady--and
more's the pity.
"Well, the story goes that she went out iv her mind, bekase of loosin'
the king's son--for she was tindher-hearted, God help her! like the rest
iv us--and pined away after him, until at last no one about seen her,
good or bad; and the story wint that the fairies took her away.
"Well, sir, in coorse o' time the white throut, God bless it! was seen
in the sthrame beyant; and sure the people didn't know what to think of
the crathur, seein' as how a _white_ brown throut was never heerd av
afore nor sence; and years upon years the throut was there, just where
you seen it this blessed minit, longer nor I can tell--aye, throth, and
beyant the memory o' th' ouldest in the village.
"At last the people began to think it must be a fairy; for what else
could it be?--and no hurt nor harm was iver put an the throut, until
some wicked sinners of sojers kem to these parts, and laughed at all the
people, and gibed and jeered them for thinkin' o' the likes; and one o'
them in partic'lar (bad luck to him--God forgi' me for sayin' it!) swore
he'd catch the throut and ate it for his dinner--the blackguard!
"Well, what would you think o' the villiany of the sojer?--sure enough
he cotch the throut, and away wid him home, and puts an the fryin' pan,
and into it he pitches the purty little thing. The throut squeeled all
as one as a Christian crathur, and, my dear, you'd think the sojer id
split his sides laughin'--for he was a harden'd villian; and when he
thought one side was done, he turns it over to fry the other; and what
would you think? but the divil a taste of a burn was an it at all at
all; and sure the sojer thought it was a _quare_ throut that couldn't be
briled; 'but,' says he, 'I'll give it another turn by and by'--little
thinkin' what was in store for him, the haythen!
"Well, when he thought that side was done he turns it again--and lo and
behould you, the divil a taste more done that side was nor the other.
'Bad luck to me,' says the sojer, 'but that bates the world,' says he;
'but I'll thry you agin, my darlint,' says he, 'as cunnin' as you think
yourself'--and so with that he turns it over and over, but not a sign av
the fire was an the purty throut. 'Well,' says the desperate
villian--(for sure, sir, only he was a desperate villian _entirely_; he
might know he was doin' a wrong thing, seein' that all his endayvours
was no good)--'well,' says he, 'my jolly little throut, maybe you're
fried enough, though you don't seem over well dress'd; but you may be
better than you look, like a singed cat, and a tit-bit, afther all,'
says he; and with that he ups with his knife and fork to taste a piece
o' the throut--but, my jew'l, the minit he puts his knife into the fish
there was a murtherin' screech, that you'd think the life id lave you if
you heerd it, and away jumps the throut out av the fryin' pan into the
middle o' the flure; and an the spot where it fell up riz a lovely
lady--the beautifullest young crathur that eyes ever seen, dressed in
white, and a band o' goold in her hair, and a sthrame o' blood runnin'
down her arm.
"'Look where you cut me, you villian,' says she, and she held out her
arm to him--and, my dear, he thought the sight id lave his eyes.
"'Couldn't you lave me cool and comfortable in the river where you
snared me, and not disturb me in my duty?' says she.
"Well, he thrimbled like a dog in a wet sack, and at last he stammered
out somethin', and begged for his life, and ax'd her ladyship's pardin,
and said he didn't know she was an duty, or he was too good a sojer not
to know betther nor to meddle with her.
"'I _was_ on duty then,' says the lady; 'I was watchin' for my thrue
love that is comin' by wather to me,' says she; 'an' if he comes while I
am away, an' that I miss iv him, I'll turn you into a pinkeen, and I'll
hunt you up and down for evermore, while grass grows or wather runs.'
"Well, the sojer thought the life id lave him at the thoughts iv his
bein' turned into a pinkeen, and begged for marcy; and, with that, says
the lady:
"'Renounce your evil coorses,' says she, 'you villian, or you'll repint
it too late. Be a good man for the futhur, and go to your duty reg'lar.
And now,' says she, 'take me back and put me into the river agin, where
you found me.'
"'Oh, my lady,' says the sojer, 'how could I have the heart to drownd a
beautiful lady like you?'
"But before he could say another word the lady was vanished, and there
he saw the little throut an the ground. Well, he put it in a clane
plate, and away he run for the bare life, for fear her lover would come
while she was away; and he run, and he run, ever till he came to the
cave agin, and threw the throut into the river. The minit he did, the
wather was as red as blood until the sthrame washed the stain away; and
to this day there's a little red mark an the throut's side where it was
cut.
"Well, sir, from that day out the sojer was an althered man, and
reformed his ways, and wint to his duty reg'lar, and fasted three times
a week--though it was never fish he tuk an fastin' days; for afther the
fright he got fish id never rest an his stomach--savin' your presence.
But, anyhow, he was an althered man, as I said before; and in coorse o'
time he left the army, and turned hermit at last; and they say he _used
to pray evermore for the sowl of the White Throut_."


