
THERE was once a man who had three sons. The youngest of them was called
Dullhead, and was sneered and jeered at and snubbed on every possible
opportunity.
One day it happened that the eldest son wished to go into the forest to
cut wood, and before he started his mother gave him a fine rich cake and
a bottle of wine, so that he might be sure not to suffer from hunger or
thirst.
When he reached the forest he met a little old grey man who wished him
'Good-morning,' and said: 'Do give me a piece of that cake you have got
in your pocket, and let me have a draught of your wine--I am so hungry
and thirsty.'
But this clever son replied: 'If I give you my cake and wine I shall
have none left for myself; you just go your own way;' and he left the
little man standing there and went further on into the forest. There he
began to cut down a tree, but before long he made a false stroke with
his axe, and cut his own arm so badly that he was obliged to go home and
have it bound up.
Then the second son went to the forest, and his mother gave him a good
cake and a bottle of wine as she had to his elder brother. He too met
the little old grey man, who begged him for a morsel of cake and a
draught of wine.
But the second son spoke most sensibly too, and said: 'Whatever I give
to you I deprive myself of. Just go your own way, will you?' Not long
after his punishment overtook him, for no sooner had he struck a couple
of blows on a tree with his axe, than he cut his leg so badly that he
had to be carried home.
So then Dullhead said: 'Father, let me go out and cut wood.'
But his father answered: 'Both your brothers have injured themselves.
You had better leave it alone; you know nothing about it.'
But Dullhead begged so hard to be allowed to go that at last his father
said: 'Very well, then--go. Perhaps when you have hurt yourself, you may
learn to know better.' His mother only gave him a very plain cake made
with water and baked in the cinders, and a bottle of sour beer.
When he got to the forest, he too met the little grey old man, who
greeted him and said: 'Give me a piece of your cake and a draught from
your bottle; I am so hungry and thirsty.'
And Dullhead replied: 'I've only got a cinder-cake and some sour beer,
but if you care to have that, let us sit down and eat.'
So they sat down, and when Dullhead brought out his cake he found it
had turned into a fine rich cake, and the sour beer into excellent wine.
Then they ate and drank, and when they had finished the little man
said: 'Now I will bring you luck, because you have a kind heart and are
willing to share what you have with others. There stands an old tree;
cut it down, and amongst its roots you'll find something.' With that the
little man took leave.
Then Dullhead fell to at once to hew down the tree, and when it fell he
found amongst its roots a goose, whose feathers were all of pure gold.
He lifted it out, carried it off, and took it with him to an inn where
he meant to spend the night.
Now the landlord of the inn had three daughters, and when they saw the
goose they were filled with curiosity as to what this wonderful bird
could be, and each longed to have one of its golden feathers.
The eldest thought to herself: 'No doubt I shall soon find a good
opportunity to pluck out one of its feathers,' and the first time
Dullhead happened to leave the room she caught hold of the goose by its
wing. But, lo and behold! her fingers seemed to stick fast to the goose,
and she could not take her hand away.
Soon after the second daughter came in, and thought to pluck a golden
feather for herself too; but hardly had she touched her sister than
she stuck fast as well. At last the third sister came with the same
intentions, but the other two cried out: 'Keep off! for Heaven's sake,
keep off!'
The younger sister could not imagine why she was to keep off, and
thought to herself: 'If they are both there, why should not I be there
too?'
So she sprang to them; but no sooner had she touched one of them than
she stuck fast to her. So they all three had to spend the night with the
goose.
Next morning Dullhead tucked the goose under his arm and went off,
without in the least troubling himself about the three girls who were
hanging on to it. They just had to run after him right or left as best
they could. In the middle of a field they met the parson, and when he
saw this procession he cried: 'For shame, you bold girls! What do you
mean by running after a young fellow through the fields like that? Do
you call that proper behaviour?' And with that he caught the youngest
girl by the hand to try and draw her away. But directly he touched her
he hung on himself, and had to run along with the rest of them.
Not long after the clerk came that way, and was much surprised to see
the parson following the footsteps of three girls. 'Why, where is your
reverence going so fast?' cried he; 'don't forget there is to be a
christening to-day;' and he ran after him, caught him by the sleeve, and
hung on to it himself: As the five of them trotted along in this fashion
one after the other, two peasants were coming from their work with their
hoes. On seeing them the parson called out and begged them to come and
rescue him and the clerk. But no sooner did they touch the clerk
than they stuck on too, and so there were seven of them running after
Dullhead and his goose.
After a time they all came to a town where a King reigned whose daughter
was so serious and solemn that no one could ever manage to make her
laugh. So the King had decreed that whoever should succeed in making her
laugh should marry her.
When Dullhead heard this he marched before the Princess with his
goose and its appendages, and as soon as she saw these seven people
continually running after each other she burst out laughing, and could
not stop herself. Then Dullhead claimed her as his bride, but the
King, who did not much fancy him as a son-in-law, made all sorts of
objections, and told him he must first find a man who could drink up a
whole cellarful of wine.
Dullhead bethought him of the little grey man, who could, he felt sure,
help him; so he went off to the forest, and on the very spot where he
had cut down the tree he saw a man sitting with a most dismal expression
of face.
Dullhead asked him what he was taking so much to heart, and the man
answered: 'I don't know how I am ever to quench this terrible thirst I
am suffering from. Cold water doesn't suit me at all. To be sure I've
emptied a whole barrel of wine, but what is one drop on a hot stone?'
'I think I can help you,' said Dullhead. 'Come with me, and you shall
drink to your heart's content.' So he took him to the King's cellar, and
the man sat down before the huge casks and drank and drank till he drank
up the whole contents of the cellar before the day closed.
Then Dullhead asked once more for his bride, but the King felt vexed at
the idea of a stupid fellow whom people called 'Dullhead' carrying
off his daughter, and he began to make fresh conditions. He required
Dullhead to find a man who could eat a mountain of bread. Dullhead did
not wait to consider long but went straight off to the forest, and there
on the same spot sat a man who was drawing in a strap as tight as he
could round his body, and making a most woeful face the while. Said he:
'I've eaten up a whole oven full of loaves, but what's the good of that
to anyone who is as hungry as I am? I declare my stomach feels quite
empty, and I must draw my belt tight if I'm not to die of starvation.'
Dullhead was delighted, and said: 'Get up and come with me, and you
shall have plenty to eat,' and he brought him to the King's Court.
Now the King had given orders to have all the flour in his kingdom
brought together, and to have a huge mountain baked of it. But the man
from the wood just took up his stand before the mountain and began to
eat, and in one day it had all vanished.
For the third time Dullhead asked for his bride, but again the King
tried to make some evasion, and demanded a ship 'which could sail on
land or water! When you come sailing in such a ship,' said he, 'you
shall have my daughter without further delay.'
Again Dullhead started off to the forest, and there he found the little
old grey man with whom he had shared his cake, and who said: 'I have
eaten and I have drunk for you, and now I will give you the ship. I have
done all this for you because you were kind and merciful to me.'
Then he gave Dullhead a ship which could sail on land or water, and when
the King saw it he felt he could no longer refuse him his daughter.
So they celebrated the wedding with great rejoicings; and after the
King's death Dullhead succeeded to the kingdom, and lived happily with
his wife for many years after.(30)



There was once a man who had three sons. The youngest was called
Dummerly, and was on all occasions scorned and ill-treated by the whole
family. It happened that the eldest took it into his head one day to go
into the forest to cut wood; and his mother gave him a delicious meat
pie and a bottle of wine to take with him, that he might sustain himself
at his work. As he went into the forest, a little old man bid him good
day, and said, "Give me a little bit of meat from your plate, and a
little wine out of your flask; I am very hungry and thirsty." But this
clever young man said, "Give you my meat and wine! No, I thank you;
there would not be enough left for me;" and he went on his way. He soon
began to chop down a tree; but he had not worked long before he missed
his stroke, and cut himself, and was obliged to go home and have the
wound bound up. Now, it was the little old man who caused him this
mischief.
Next the second son went out to work; and his mother gave him, too, a
meat pie and a bottle of wine. And the same little old man encountered
him also, and begged him for something to eat and drink. But he, too,
thought himself extremely clever, and said, "Whatever you get, I shall
be without; so go your way!" The little man made sure that he should
have his reward; and the second stroke that he struck at a tree, hit him
on the leg, so that he too was compelled to go home.
Then Dummerly said, "Father, I should like to go and cut fuel too." But
his father replied, "Your brothers have both maimed themselves; you had
better stop at home, for you know nothing of the job." But Dummerly was
very urgent; and at last his father said, "Go your way; you will be
wiser when you have suffered for your foolishness." And his mother gave
him only some dry bread, and a bottle of sour ale; but when he went into
the forest, he met the little old man, who said, "Give me some meat and
drink, for I am very hungry and thirsty." Dummerly said, "I have nothing
but dry bread and sour beer; if that will do for you, we will sit down
and eat it together." So they sat down, and when the lad took out his
bread, behold it was turned into a splendid meat pie, and his sour beer
became delicious wine! They ate and drank heartily, and when they had
finished, the little man said, "As you have a kind heart, and have been
willing to share everything with me I will bring good to you. There
stands an old tree; chop it down, and you will find something at the
root." Then he took his leave and went his way.
Dummerly set to work, and cut down the tree; and when it fell, he
discovered in a hollow under the roots a goose with plumage of pure
gold. He took it up, and went on to an inn, where he proposed sleep for
the night. The landlord had three daughters, and when they saw the
goose, they were very curious to find out what this wonderful bird could
be, and wished very much to pluck one of the feathers out of its tail.
At last the eldest said, "I must and will have a feather." So she waited
till his back was turned, and then caught hold of the goose by the wing;
but to her great surprise, there she stuck, for neither hand nor finger
could she pull away again. Presently in came the second sister, and
thought to have a feather too; but the instant she touched her sister,
there she too hung fast. At last came the third, and desired a feather;
but the other two cried out, "Keep away! for heaven's sake, keep away!"
However, she did not understand what they meant. "If they are there,"
thought she, "I may as well be there too," so she went up to them. But
the moment she touched her sisters she stuck fast, and hung to the goose
as they did. And so they abode with the goose all night.
The next morning Dummerly carried off the goose under his arm, and took
no heed of the three girls, but went out with them sticking fast behind;
and wherever he journeyed, the three were obliged to follow, whether
they wished or not, as fast as their legs could carry them.
In the middle of a field the parson met them; and when he saw the
procession, he said, "Are you not ashamed of yourselves, you bold girls,
to run after the young man like that over the fields? Is that proper
behavior?"
Then he took the youngest by the hand to lead her away; but the moment
he touched her he, too, hung fast, and followed in the procession.
Presently up came the clerk; and when he saw his master, the parson,
running after the three girls, he was greatly surprised, and said,
"Hollo! hollo! your reverence! whither so fast! There is a christening
to-day."
Then he ran up, and caught him by the gown, and instantly he was fast
too.
As the five were thus trudging along, one after another, they met two
laborers with their mattocks coming from work; and the parson called out
to them to set him free. But hardly had they touched him, when they,
too, joined the ranks, and so made seven, all running after Dummerly and
his goose.
At last they came to a city, where reigned a King who had an only
daughter. The princess was of so thoughtful and serious a turn of mind
that no one could make her laugh; and the King had announced to all the
world that whoever could make her laugh should have her for his wife.
When the young man heard this, he went to her with the goose and all its
followers; and as soon as she saw the seven all hanging together, and
running about, treading on each other's heels, she could not help
bursting into a long and loud laugh.
Then Dummerly claimed her for his bride; the wedding took place, and he
was heir to the kingdom, and lived long and happily with his wife.





