
When O'Conor was King over Ireland he was living in Rathcroghan, of
Connacht. He had one son, but he, when he grew up, was wild, and the
King could not control him, because he would have his own will in
everything.
One morning he went out--
  His hound at his foot,
  And his hawk on his hand,
  And his fine black horse to bear him--
and he went forward, singing a verse of a song to himself, until he came
as far as a big bush that was growing on the brink of a glen. There was
a grey old man sitting at the foot of the bush, and he said, "King's
son, if you are able to play as well as you are able to sing songs, I
would like to play a game with you." The King's son thought that it was
a silly old man that was in it, and he alighted, threw bridle over
branch, and sat down by the side of the grey old man.
The old man drew out a pack of cards and asked, "Can you play these?"
"I can," said the King's son.
"What shall we play for?" said the grey old man.
"Anything you wish," says the King's son.
"All right; if I win you must do for me anything I shall ask of you, and
if you win I must do for you anything you ask of me," says the grey old
man.
"I'm satisfied," says the King's son.
They played the game, and the King's son beat the grey old man. Then he
said, "What would you like me to do for you, King's son?"
"I won't ask you to do anything for me," says the King's son. "I think
that you are not able to do much."
"Don't mind that," said the old man. "You must ask me to do something. I
never lost a bet yet that I wasn't able to pay it."
As I said, the King's son thought that it was a silly old man that was
in it, and to satisfy him he said to him, "Take the head off my
stepmother and put a goat's head on her for a week."
"I'll do that for you," said the grey old man. The King's son went
a-riding on his horse--
  His hound at his foot,
  His hawk on his hand--
and he faced for another place, and never thought more about the grey
old man until he came home.
He found a cry and great grief in the castle. The servants told him that
an enchanter had come into the room where the Queen was, and had put a
goat's head on her in place of her own head.
"By my hand, but that's a wonderful thing," says the King's son. "If I
had been at home I'd have whipt the head off him with my sword."
There was great grief on the King, and he sent for a wise councillor,
and asked him did he know how the thing happened to the Queen.
"Indeed, I cannot tell you that," said he; "it's a work of enchantment."
The King's son did not let on that he had any knowledge of the matter,
but on the morrow morning he went out--
  His hound at his foot,
  His hawk on his hand,
  And his fine black horse to bear him--
and he never drew rein until he came as far as the big bush on the brink
of the glen. The grey old man was sitting there under the bush, and
said, "King's son, will you have a game to-day?" The King's son got down
and said, "I will." With that he threw bridle over branch and sat down
by the side of the old man. He drew out the cards and asked the King's
son did he get the thing he had won yesterday.
"That's all right," said the King's son.
"We'll play for the same bet to-day," says the grey old man.
"I'm satisfied," said the King's son.
They played--the King's son won. "What would you like me to do for you
this time?" says the grey old man. The King's son thought and said to
himself, "I'll give him a hard job this time." Then he said, "There's a
field of seven acres at the back of my father's castle; let it be filled
to-morrow morning with cows, and no two of them to be of one colour, or
one height, or one age."
"That shall be done," says the grey old man.
The King's son went riding on his horse--
  His hound at his foot,
  His hawk on his hand--
and faced for home. The King was sorrowful about the Queen; there were
doctors out of every place in Ireland, but they could not do her any
good.
On the morning of the next day the King's herd went out early, and he
saw the field at the back of the castle filled with cows, and no two of
them of the same colour, the same age, or the same height. He went in
and told the King the wonderful news. "Go and drive them out," says the
King. The herd got men, and went with them driving out the cows, but no
sooner would he put them out on one side than they would come in on the
other. The herd went to the King again, and told him that all the men
that were in Ireland would not be able to put out these cows that were
in the field. "They're enchanted cows," said the King.
When the King's son saw the cows, he said to himself, "I'll have
another game with the grey old man to-day!" That morning he went out--
  His hound at his foot,
  His hawk on his hand,
  And his fine black horse to bear him--
and he never drew rein till he came as far as the big bush on the brink
of the glen. The grey old man was there before him, and asked him would
he have a game of cards.
"I will," says the King's son; "but you know well that I can beat you
playing cards."
"We'll have another game, then," says the grey old man. "Did you ever
play ball?"
"I did, indeed," said the King's son; "but I think that you are too old
to play ball, and, besides that, we have no place here to play it."
"If you're contented to play, I'll find a place," says the grey old man.
"I'm contented," says the King's son.
"Follow me," says the grey old man.
The King's son followed him through the glen until he came to a fine
green hill. There he drew out a little enchanted rod, spoke some words
which the King's son did not understand, and after a moment the hill
opened and the two went in, and they passed through a number of splendid
halls until they came out into a garden. There was everything finer than
another in that garden, and at the bottom of the garden there was a
place for playing ball. They threw up a piece of silver to see who would
have hand-in, and the grey old man got it.
They began then, and the grey old man never stopped until he won out the
game. The King's son did not know what he would do. At last he asked the
old man what would he desire him to do for him.
"I am King over the Black Desert, and you must find out myself and my
dwelling-place within a year and a day, or I shall find you out and you
shall lose your head."
Then he brought the King's son out the same way by which he went in. The
green hill closed behind them, and the grey old man disappeared out of
sight.
The King's son went home, riding on his horse--
  His hound at his foot,
  His hawk on his hand--
and he sorrowful enough.
That evening the King observed that there was grief and great trouble on
his young son, and when he went to sleep the King and every person that
was in the castle heard heavy sighings and ravings from him. The King
was in grief--a goat's head to be on the Queen--but he was seven times
worse when they told him the (whole) story how it happened from
beginning to end.
He sent for a wise councillor, and asked him did he know where the King
of the Black Desert was living.
"I do not, indeed," said he; "but as sure as there's a tail on the cat,
unless the young heir finds out that enchanter he will lose his head."
There was great grief that day in the castle of the King. There was a
goat's head on the Queen, and the King's son was going searching for an
enchanter, without knowing whether he would ever come back.
After a week the goat's head was taken off the Queen, and her own head
was put upon her. When she heard of how the goat's head was put upon
her, a great hate came upon her against the King's son, and she said
"that he may never come back, alive or dead."
Of a Monday morning he left his blessing with his father and his
kindred; his travelling bag was bound upon his shoulder, and he went--
  His hound at his foot,
  His hawk on his hand,
  And his fine black horse to bear him.
He walked that day until the sun was gone beneath the shadow of the
hills and till the darkness of the night was coming, without knowing
where he could get lodgings. He noticed a large wood on his left-hand
side, and he drew towards it as quickly as he could, hoping to spend the
night under the shelter of the trees. He sat down at the foot of a large
oak tree, and opened his travelling bag to take some food and drink,
when he saw a great eagle coming towards him.
"Do not be afraid of me, King's son; I know you--you are the son of
O'Conor, King of Ireland. I am a friend, and if you give me your horse
to give to eat to four hungry birds that I have, I shall bear you
farther than your horse would bear you, and, perhaps, I would put you on
the track of him you are looking for."
"You can have the horse, and welcome," says the King's son, "although
I'm sorrowful at parting from him."
"All right, I shall be here to-morrow at sunrise." With that she opened
her great gob, caught hold of the horse, struck in his two sides against
one another, took wing, and disappeared out of sight.
The King's son ate and drank his enough, put his travelling bag under
his head, and it was not long till he was asleep, and he never awoke
till the eagle came and said, "It is time for us to be going; there is a
long journey before us. Take hold of your bag and leap up upon my back."
"But to my grief," says he, "I must part from my hound and my hawk."
"Do not be grieved," says she; "they will be here before you when you
come back."
Then he leaped up on her back. She took wing, and off and away with her
through the air. She brought him across hills and hollows, over a great
sea, and over woods, till he thought that he was at the end of the
world. When the sun was going under the shadow of the hills, she came to
earth in the midst of a great desert, and said to him, "Follow the path
on your right-hand side, and it will bring you to the house of a friend.
I must return again to provide for my birds."
He followed the path, and it was not long till he came to the house, and
he went in. There was a grey old man sitting in the corner. He rose and
said, "A hundred thousand welcomes to you, King's son, from Rathcroghan
of Connacht."
"I have no knowledge of you," said the King's son.
"I was acquainted with your grandfather," said the grey old man. "Sit
down; no doubt there is hunger and thirst on you."
"I'm not free from them," said the King's son.
The old man then smote his two palms against one another, and two
servants came and laid a board with beef, mutton, pork, and plenty of
bread before the King's son, and the old man said to him:
"Eat and drink your enough. Perhaps it may be a long time before you get
the like again."
He ate and drank as much as he desired, and thanked him for it.
Then the old man said, "You are going seeking for the King of the Black
Desert. Go to sleep now, and I will go through my books to see if I can
find out the dwelling-place of that King." Then he smote his palms
together, and a servant came, and he told him, "Take the King's son to
his chamber." He took him to a fine chamber, and it was not long till he
fell asleep.
On the morning of the next day the old man came and said:
"Rise up, there is a long journey before you. You must do five hundred
miles before midday."
"I could not do it," said the King's son.
"If you are a good rider I will give you a horse that will bring you
over the journey."
"I will do as you say," said the King's son.
The old man gave him plenty to eat and to drink, and, when he was
satisfied, he gave him a little white garron, and said, "Give the garron
his head, and when he stops look up into the air, and you will see three
swans as white as snow. Those are the three daughters of the King of the
Black Desert. There will be a green napkin in the mouth of one of them:
that is the youngest daughter, and there is not anyone alive except her
who could bring you to the house of the King of the Black Desert. When
the garron stops you will be near a lake. The three swans will come to
land on the brink of that lake, and they will make three young women of
themselves, and they will go into the lake swimming and dancing. Keep
your eye on the green napkin, and when you get the young women in the
lake, go and get the napkin, and do not part with it. Go into hiding
under a tree, and when the young women will come out, two of them will
make swans of themselves, and will go away in the air. Then the youngest
daughter will say, "I will do anything for him who will give me my
napkin." Come forward then and give her the napkin, and say there is
nothing you want but to bring you to her father's house, and tell her
you are a king's son from a powerful country."
The King's son did everything as the old man desired him, and when he
gave the napkin to the daughter of the King of the Black Desert, he
said, "I am the son of O'Conor, King of Connaught. Bring me to your
father. Long am I seeking him."
"Would not it be better for me to do something else for you?" said she.
"I do not want anything else," said he.
"If I show you the house will you not be satisfied?" said she.
"I will be satisfied," said he.
"Now," said she, "upon your life do not tell my father that it was I who
brought you to his house, and I shall be a good friend to you; but let
on," said she, "that you have great powers of enchantment."
"I will do as you say," says he.
Then she made a swan of herself, and said, "Leap up on my back and put
your hands under my neck, and keep a hard hold."
He did so, and she shook her wings, and off and away with her over hills
and over glens, over sea and over mountains, until she came to earth as
the sun was going under. Then she said to him, "Do you see that great
house yonder? That is my father's house. Farewell. Any time that you are
in danger I shall be at your side." Then she went from him.
The King's son went to the house and went in, and who should he see
sitting in a golden chair but the grey old man who had played the cards
and the ball with him.
"King's son," said he, "I see that you have found me out before the day
and the year. How long since you left home?"
"This morning, when I was rising out of my bed, I saw a rainbow. I gave
a leap, spread my two legs on it, and slid as far as this."
"By my hand, it was a great feat you performed," said the old King.
"I could do a more wonderful thing than that if I chose," said the
King's son.
"I have three things for you to do," says the old King, "and if you are
able to do them, you shall have the choice of my three daughters for
wife, and unless you are able to do them, you shall lose your head, as a
good many other young men have lost it before you."
"Then," he said, "there be's neither eating nor drinking in my house
except once in the week, and we had it this morning."
"It's all one to me," said the King's son. "I could fast for a month if
I were on a pinch."
"No doubt you can go without sleep also," says the old King.
"I can, without doubt," said the King's son.
"You shall have a hard bed to-night, then," says the old King. "Come
with me till I show it to you." He brought him out then and showed him a
great tree with a fork in it, and said, "Get up there and sleep in the
fork, and be ready with the rise of the sun."
He went up into the fork, but as soon as the old King was asleep the
young daughter came and brought him into a fine room, and kept him there
until the old King was about to rise. Then she put him out again into
the fork of the tree.
With the rise of the sun the old King came to him, and said, "Come down
now and come with me until I show you the thing that you have to do
to-day."
He brought the King's son to the brink of a lake and showed him an old
castle, and said to him, "Throw every stone in that castle out into the
loch, and let you have it done before the sun goes down in the evening."
He went away from him then.
The King's son began working, but the stones were stuck to one another
so fast that he was not able to raise one of them, and if he were to be
working until this day, there would not be one stone out of the castle.
He sat down then, thinking what he ought to do, and it was not long
until the daughter of the old King came to him and said, "What is the
cause of your grief?" He told her the work which he had to do. "Let that
put no grief on you; I will do it," said she. Then she gave him bread,
meat, and wine, pulled out a little enchanted rod, struck a blow on the
old castle, and in a moment every stone of it was at the bottom of the
lake. "Now," said she, "do not tell my father that it was I who did the
work for you."
When the sun was going down in the evening, the old King came and said,
"I see that you have your day's work done."
"I have," said the King's son; "I can do any work at all."
The old King thought now that the King's son had great powers of
enchantment, and he said to him, "Your day's work for to-morrow is to
lift the stones out of the loch, and to set up the castle again as it
was before."
He brought the King's son home, and said to him, "Go to sleep in the
place where you were last night."
When the old King went to sleep the young daughter came and brought him
into the fine chamber, and kept him there till the old King was about to
rise in the morning. Then she put him out again in the fork of the tree.
At sunrise the old King came and said, "It's time for you to get to
work."
"There's no hurry on me at all," says the King's son, "because I know I
can readily do my day's work."
He then went to the brink of the lake, but he was not able to see a
stone, the water was that black. He sat down on a rock, and it was not
long until Finnuala--that was the name of the old King's daughter--came
to him and said, "What have you to do to-day?" He told her, and she
said, "Let there be no grief on you. I can do that work for you." Then
she gave him bread, beef, mutton, and wine. After that she drew out the
little enchanted rod, smote the water of the lake with it, and in a
moment the old castle was set up as it had been the day before. Then she
said to him, "On your life, don't tell my father that I did this work
for you, or that you have any knowledge of me at all."
On the evening of that day the old King came and said, "I see that you
have the day's work done."
"I have," said the King's son; "that was an easy-done job."
Then the old King thought that the King's son had more power of
enchantment than he had himself, and he said, "You have only one other
thing to do." He brought him home then, and put him to sleep in the fork
of the tree, but Finnuala came and put him into the fine chamber, and in
the morning she sent him out again into the tree. At sunrise the old
King came to him, and said, "Come with me till I show you your day's
work."
He brought the King's son to a great glen, and showed him a well, and
said, "My grandmother lost a ring in that well, and do you get it for me
before the sun goes under this morning."
Now, this well was one hundred feet deep and twenty feet round about,
and it was filled with water, and there was an army out of hell watching
the ring.
When the old King went away Finnuala came and asked, "What have you to
do to-day?" He told her, and she said, "That is a difficult task, but I
shall do my best to save your life." Then she gave him beef, bread, and
wine. Then she made a diver of herself, and went down into the well. It
was not long till he saw smoke and lightning coming up out of the well,
and he heard a sound like thunder, and anyone who would be listening to
that noise, he would think that the army of hell was fighting.
At the end of a while the smoke went away, the lightning and thunder
ceased, and Finnuala came up with the ring. She handed the ring to the
King's son, and said, "I won the battle, and your life is saved. But,
look, the little finger of my right hand is broken. But perhaps it's a
lucky thing that it was broken. When my father comes do not give him
the ring, but threaten him stoutly. He will bring you, then, to choose
your wife, and this is how you shall make your choice. I and my sisters
will be in a room; there will be a hole in the door, and we shall all
put our hands out in a cluster. You will put your hand through the hole,
and the hand that you will keep hold of when my father will open the
door, that is the hand of her you shall have for wife. You can know me
by my broken little finger."
"I can; and the love of my heart you are, Finnuala," says the King's
son.
On the evening of that day the old King came and asked, "Did you get my
grandmother's ring?"
"I did, indeed," says the King's son. "There was an army out of hell
guarding it, but I beat them; and I would beat seven times as many.
Don't you know I'm a Connachtman?"
"Give me the ring," says the old King.
"Indeed, I won't give it," says he. "I fought hard for it. But do you
give me my wife; I want to be going."
The old King brought him in, and said, "My three daughters are in that
room before you. The hand of each of them is stretched out, and she on
whom you will keep your hold until I open the door, that one is your
wife."
The King's son thrust his hand through the hole that was in the door,
and caught hold of the hand with the broken little finger, and kept a
tight hold of it until the old King opened the door of the room.
"This is my wife," said the King's son. "Give me now your daughter's
fortune."
"She has no fortune to get, but the brown slender steed to bring you
home, and that ye may never come back, alive or dead!"
The King's son and Finnuala went riding on the brown slender steed, and
it was not long till they came to the wood where the King's son left his
hound and his hawk. They were there before him, together with his fine
black horse. He sent the brown slender steed back then. He set Finnuala
riding on his horse, and leaped up himself--
  His hound at his heel,
  His hawk on his hand--
and he never stopped till he came to Rathcroghan.
There was great welcome before him there, and it was not long till
himself and Finnuala were married. They spent a long, prosperous life.
But it is scarcely that even the track of this old castle is to be found
to-day in Rathcroghan of Connacht.
DOUGLAS HYDE.

