
You see, there was a waiver lived wanst upon a time in Duleek here, hard
by the gate, and a very honest, industherous man he was by all accounts.
Well, it was one mornin' that his housekeeper called to him, and he
sitting very busy throwin' the shuttle; and says she, "Your brekquest is
ready!" "Lave me alone," says he; "I'm busy with a patthern here that is
brakin' my heart, and until I complate and masther it intirely I won't
quit."
"Oh, think o' the iligant stirabout that'll be spylte intirely."
"To the divil with the stirabout!" says he.
"God forgive you," says she, "for cursin' your good brekquest."
Well, he left the loom at last and wint over to the stirabout, and what
would you think, but whin he looked at it, it was as black as a crow;
for, you see, it was in the hoighth o' summer, and the flies lit upon it
to that degree that the stirabout was fairly covered with them.
"Why, thin, bad luck to your impidence," says the waiver; "would no
place sarve you but that? And is it spyling my brekquest yiz are, you
dirty bastes?" And with that, bein' altogether cruked tempered at the
time, he lifted his hand, and he made one great slam at the dish o'
stirabout and killed no less than three score and tin flies at the one
blow. It was three score and tin exactly, for he counted the carcasses
one by one, and laid them out on a clane plate for to view them.
Well, he felt a powerful sperit risin' in him when he seen the slaughter
he done at one blow, and with that he got as consaited as the very
dickens, and not a sthroke more work he'd do that day, but out he wint,
and was fractious and impident to everyone he met, and was squarein' up
into their faces and sayin', "Look at that fist! That's the fist that
killed three score and tin at one blow. Whoo! It is throwin' away my
time I have been all my life," says he, "stuck to my loom, nothin' but a
poor waiver, when it is Saint George or the Dhraggin I ought to be,
which is two of the sivin champions o' Christendom. I'm detarmined on
it, and I'll set off immediately and be a knight arriant." Well, sure
enough, he wint about among his neighbours the next day, and he got an
owld kittle from one and a saucepan from another, and he took them to
the tailor, and he sewed him up a shuit o' tin clothes like any knight
arriant, and he borrowed a pot lid, and _that_ he was very partic'lar
about, bekase it was his shield, and he wint to a friend o' his, a
painther and glaizier, and made him paint an his shield in big letthers:
  "I'M THE MAN OF ALL MIN,
  THAT KILL'D THREE SCORE AND TIN
  AT A BLOW."
"When the people sees that," says the waiver to himself, "the sorra one
will dar for to come near me."
And with that he towld the housekeeper to scour out the small iron pot
for him, "for," says he, "it will make an iligant helmet." And when it
was done he put it an his head, and says she, "Is it puttin' a great
heavy iron pot an your head you are by way iv a hat?"
"Sartinly," says he, "for a knight arriant should always have a woight
an his brain."
"But," says she, "there's a hole in it, and it can't keep out the
weather."
"It will be the cooler," says he, puttin' it an him; "besides, if I
don't like it, it is aisy to stop it with a wisp o' sthraw, or the like
o' that."
"The three legs of it looks mighty quare stickin' up," says she.
"Every helmet has a spike stickin' out o' the top of it," says the
waiver, "and if mine has three, it's only the grandher it is."
"Well," says the housekeeper, getting bitther at last, "all I can say
is, it isn't the first sheep's head was dhress'd in it."
"Your sarvint, ma'am," says he; and off he set.
Well, he was in want of a horse, and so he wint to a field hard by where
the miller's horse was grazin' that used to carry the ground corn round
the counthry.
"This is the idintical horse for me," says the waiver. "He is used to
carryin' flour and male; and what am I but the flower o' shovelry in a
coat o' mail; so that the horse won't be put out iv his way in the
laste."
But as he was ridin' him out o' the field, who should see him but the
miller. "Is it stalin' my horse you are, honest man?" says the miller.
"No," says the waiver; "I'm only goin' to axercise him," says he, "in
the cool o' the evenin'; it will be good for his health."
"Thank you kindly," says the miller, "but lave him where he is, and
you'll obleege me."
"I can't afford it," says the waiver, runnin' the horse at the ditch.
"Bad luck to your impidence," says the miller; "you've as much tin about
you as a thravellin' tinker, but you've more brass. Come back here, you
vagabone," says he.
But he was too late--away galloped the waiver, and took the road to
Dublin, for he thought the best thing he could do was to go to the King
o' Dublin (for Dublin was a grate place thin, and had a king iv its
own), and he thought maybe the King o' Dublin would give him work. Well,
he was four days goin' to Dublin, for the baste was not the best, and
the roads worse, not all as one as now; but there was no turnpikes then,
glory be to God! Whin he got to Dublin he wint sthrait to the palace,
and whin he got into the coortyard he let his horse go and graze about
the place, for the grass was growin' out betune the stones; everything
was flourishin' thin in Dublin, you see. Well, the King was lookin' out
of his dhrawin'-room windy for divarshin, whin the waiver kem in; but
the waiver pretended not to see him, and he wint over to a stone sate
undher the windy--for, you see, there was stone sates all around about
the place for the accommodation o' the people--for the King was a
dacent, obleegin' man. Well, as I said, the waiver wint over and lay
down an one o' the sates, just undher the King's windy, and purtended to
go asleep; but he took care to turn out the front of his shield that had
the letthers an it. Well, my dear, with that the King calls out to one
of the lords of his coort that was standin' behind him howldin' up the
skirt of his coat, according to rayson, and says he, "Look here," says
he, "what do you think of a vagabone like that comin' undher my very
nose to go sleep? It is thrue I'm a good King," says he, "and I
'commodate the people by havin' sates for them to sit down and enjoy the
raycreation and contimplation of seein' me here lookin' out o' my
dhrawin'-room windy for divarshin; but that is no rayson they are to
make a hotel o' the place and come and sleep here. Who is it at all?"
says the King.
"Not a one o' me knows, plaze your majesty."
"I think he must be a furriner," says the King, "bekase his dhress is
outlandish."
"And doesn't know manners, more betoken," says the lord.
"I'll go down and circumspect him myself," says the King. "Folly me,"
says he to the lord, wavin' his hand at the same time in the most
dignacious manner.
Down he wint accordingly, followed by the lord; and whin he wint over to
where the waiver was lying, sure, the first thing he seen was his shield
with the big letthers an it, and with that, says he to the lord, "By
dad," says he, "this is the very man I want."
"For what, plaze your majesty?" says the lord.
"To kill that vagabone dhraggin, to be sure," says the King.
"Sure, do you think he could kill him," says the lord, "whin all the
stoutest knights in the land wasn't aiquil to it, but never kem back,
and was ate up alive by the cruel desaiver."
"Sure, don't you see there," says the King, pointin' at the shield,
"that he killed three score and tin at one blow; and the man that done
that, I think, is a match for anything."
So, with that, he wint over to the waiver and shuck him by the shouldher
for to wake him, and the waiver rubbed his eyes as if just wakened, and
the King says to him, "God save you!" said he.
"God save you kindly!" says the waiver, purtendin' he was quite onknowst
who he was spakin' to.
"Do you know who I am," says the King, "that you make so free, good
man?"
"No, indeed," says the waiver; "you have the advantage o' me."
"To be sure I have," says the King, moighty high; "sure, ain't I the
King o' Dublin?" says he.
The waiver dhropped down on his two knees forninst the King, and says
he, "I beg God's pardon and yours for the liberty I tuk; plaze your
holiness, I hope you'll excuse it."
"No offince," says the King; "get up, good man. And what brings you
here?" says he.
"I'm in want o' work, plaze your riverence," says the waiver.
"Well, suppose I give you work?" says the King.
"I'll be proud to sarve you, my lord," says the waiver.
"Very well," says the King. "You killed three score and tin at one blow,
I understan'," says the King.
"Yis," says the waiver; "that was the last thrifle o' work I done, and
I'm afeared my hand 'ill go out o' practice if I don't get some job to
do at wanst."
"You shall have a job immediantly," says the King. "It is not three
score and tin, or any fine thing like that; it is only a blaguard
dhraggin that is disturbin' the counthry and ruinatin' my tinanthry wid
aitin' their powlthry, and I'm lost for want of eggs," says the King.
"Throth, thin, plaze your worship," says the waiver, "you look as yellow
as if you swallowed twelve yolks this minit."
"Well, I want this dhraggin to be killed," says the King. "It will be no
throuble in life to you; and I'm only sorry that it isn't betther worth
your while, for he isn't worth fearin' at all; only I must tell you that
he lives in the county Galway, in the middle of a bog, and he has an
advantage in that."
"Oh, I don't value it in the laste," says the waiver; "for the last
three score and tin I killed was in a soft place."
"When will you undhertake the job then?" says the King.
"Let me at him at wanst," says the waiver.
"That's what I like," says the King; "you're the very man for my money,"
says he.
"Talkin' of money," says the waiver, "by the same token, I'll want a
thrifle o' change from you for my thravellin' charges."
"As much as you plaze," says the King; and with the word he brought him
into his closet, where there was an owld stockin' in an oak chest
burstin' wid goolden guineas.
"Take as many as you plaze," says the King; and sure enough, my dear,
the little waiver stuffed his tin clothes as full as they could howld
with them.
"Now, I'm ready for the road," says the waiver.
"Very well," says the King; "but you must have a fresh horse," says he.
"With all my heart," says the waiver, who thought he might as well
exchange the miller's owld garron for a betther.
And, maybe, it's wondherin' you are that the waiver would think of goin'
to fight the dhraggin afther what he heerd about him when he was
purtendin' to be asleep. But he had no sitch notion: all he intended
was--to fob the goold and ride back again to Duleek with his gains and a
good horse. But, you see, cute as the waiver was, the King was cuter
still; for these high quolity, you see, is great desaivers; and so the
horse the waiver was put an was learned an purpose; and, sure, the
minit he was mounted away powdhered the horse, and the divil a toe he'd
go but right down to Galway. Well, for four days he was goin' evermore,
until at last the waiver seen a crowd o' people runnin' as if Owld Nick
was at their heels, and they shoutin' a thousand murdhers and cryin',
"The dhraggin, the dhraggin!" and he couldn't stop the horse nor make
him turn back, but away he pelted right forinst the terrible baste that
was comin' up to him, and there was the most nefarious smell o' sulphur,
savin' your presence, enough to knock you down; and, faith, the waiver
seen he had no time to lose, and so he threwn himself off the horse and
made to a three that was growin' nigh hand, and away he clambered up
into it as nimble as a cat; and not a minit had he to spare, for the
dhraggin kem up in a powerful rage, and he devoured the horse, body and
bones, in less than no time; and then he began to sniffle and scent
about for the waiver, and at last he clapt his eye an him where he was
up in the three, and says he, "In throth, you might as well come down
out o' that," says he, "for I'll have you as sure as eggs is mate."
"Divil a fut I'll go down," says the waiver.
"Sorra care I care," says the dhraggin, "for you're as good as ready
money in my pocket this minit, for I'll lie undher this three," says he,
"and sooner or later you must fall to my share"; and, sure enough, he
sot down and began to pick his teeth with his tail afther the heavy
brekquest he made that mornin' (for he ate a whole village, let alone
the horse), and he got dhrowsy at last and fell asleep; but before he
wint to sleep he wound himself all round the three, all as one as a lady
windin' ribbon round her finger, so that the waiver could not escape.
Well, as soon as the waiver knew he was dead asleep by the snorin' of
him--and every snore he let out of him was like a clap o' thunder----
The minit, the waiver began to creep down the three as cautious as a
fox; and he was very nigh hand the bottom when, bad cess to it, a
thievin' branch he was dipindin' an bruk, and down he fell right atop o'
the dhraggin. But if he did, good luck was an his side, for where should
he fall but with his two legs right acrass the dhraggin's neck, and, my
jew'l, he laid howlt o' the baste's ears, and there he kept his grip,
for the dhraggin wakened and endayvoured for to bite him; but, you see,
by rayson the waiver was behind his ears he could not come at him, and,
with that, he endayvoured for to shake him off; but the divil of a stir
could he stir the waiver; and though he shuk all the scales an his body
he could not turn the scale again the waiver.
"By the hokey, this is too bad intirely," says the dhraggin; "but if you
won't let go," says he, "by the powers o' wildfire, I'll give you a ride
that 'ill astonish your siven small sinses, my boy"; and with that away
he flew like mad; and where do you think he did fly? By dad, he flew
sthraight for Dublin--divil a less. But the waiver bein' an his neck was
a great disthress to him, and he would rather have made him an inside
_passenger_; but, anyway, he flew and he flew till he kem slap up agin
the palace o' the King; for, bein' blind with the rage, he never seen
it, and he knocked his brains out--that is, the small thrifle he had,
and down he fell spacheless. An', you see, good luck would have it that
the King o' Dublin was lookin' out iv his dhrawin'-room windy for
divarshin that day also, and whin he seen the waiver ridin' and the
fiery dhraggin (for he was blazin' like a tar barrel), he called out to
his coortyers to come and see the show. "By the powdhers o' war, here
comes the knight arriant," says the King, "ridin' the dhraggin that's
all afire, and if he gets into the palace, yiz must be ready wid the
fire ingines," says he, "for to put him out." But when they seen the
dhraggin fall outside they all run downstairs and scampered into the
palace yard for to circumspect the curiosity; and by the time they got
down the waiver had got off o' the dhraggin's neck, and runnin' up to
the King, says he, "Plaze your holiness," says he, "I did not think
myself worthy of killin' this facetious baste, so I brought him to
yourself for to do him the honour of decripitation by your own royal
five fingers. But I tamed him first before I allowed him the liberty for
to dar' to appear in your royal prisince, and you'll oblige me if you
just make your mark with your own hand upon the onruly baste's neck."
And with that the King, sure enough, dhrew out his swoord and took the
head aff the dirty brute as clane as a new pin. Well, there was great
rejoicin' in the coort that the dhraggin was killed; and says the King
to the little waiver, says he, "You are a knight arriant as it is, and
so it would be no use for to knight you over agin; but I will make you a
lord," says he.
"Oh, Lord!" says the waiver, thunderstruck like at his own good luck.
"I will," says the King; "and as you are the first man I ever heerd tell
of that rode a dhraggin, you shall be called Lord Mount Dhraggin," says
he.
"But that is not all I'll do for you," says the King; "I'll give you my
daughter, too, in marriage," says he. Now, you see, that was nothing
more than what he promised the waiver in his first promise; for by all
accounts the King's daughter was the greatest dhraggin ever was seen,
and had the divil's own tongue, and a beard a yard long, which she
purtended was put an her, by way of a penance, by Father Mulcahy, her
confissor; but it was well known it was in the family for ages, and no
wondher it was so long by rayson of that same.


