
ONCE upon a time there lived a King and Queen. They had three sons, two
of them with their wits about them, but the third a simpleton. Now
the King had a deer park in which were quantities of wild animals of
different kinds. Into that park there used to come a huge beast--Norka
was its name--and do fearful mischief, devouring some of the animals
every night. The King did all he could, but he was unable to destroy it.
So at last he called his sons together and said, 'Whoever will destroy
the Norka, to him will I give the half of my kingdom.'
Well, the eldest son undertook the task. As soon as it was night, he
took his weapons and set out. But before he reached the park, he went
into a traktir (or tavern), and there he spent the whole night in
revelry. When he came to his senses it was too late; the day had already
dawned. He felt himself disgraced in the eyes of his father, but there
was no help for it. The next day the second son went, and did just the
same. Their father scolded them both soundly, and there was an end of
it.
Well, on the third day the youngest son undertook the task. They all
laughed him to scorn, because he was so stupid, feeling sure he wouldn't
do anything. But he took his arms, and went straight into the park, and
sat down on the grass in such a position that the moment he went asleep
his weapons would prick him, and he would awake.
Presently the midnight hour sounded. The earth began to shake, and the
Norka came rushing up, and burst right through the fence into the park,
so huge was it. The Prince pulled himself together, leapt to his feet,
crossed himself, and went straight at the beast. It fled back, and the
Prince ran after it. But he soon saw that he couldn't catch it on foot,
so he hastened to the stable, laid his hands on the best horse there,
and set off in pursuit. Presently he came up with the beast, and they
began a fight. They fought and fought; the Prince gave the beast three
wounds. At last they were both utterly exhausted, so they lay down to
take a short rest. But the moment the Prince closed his eyes, up jumped
the beast and took to flight. The Prince's horse awoke him; up he jumped
in a moment, and set off again in pursuit, caught up the beast, and
again began fighting with it. Again the Prince gave the beast three
wounds, and then he and the beast lay down again to rest. Thereupon away
fled the beast as before. The Prince caught it up, and again gave it
three wounds. But all of a sudden, just as the Prince began chasing it
for the fourth time, the beast fled to a great white stone, tilted it
up, and escaped into the other world, crying out to the Prince: 'Then
only will you overcome me, when you enter here.'
The Prince went home, told his father all that had happened, and asked
him to have a leather rope plaited, long enough to reach to the other
world. His father ordered this to be done. When the rope was made, the
Prince called for his brothers, and he and they, having taken servants
with them, and everything that was needed for a whole year, set out for
the place where the beast had disappeared under the stone. When they got
there, they built a palace on the spot, and lived in it for some time.
But when everything was ready, the youngest brother said to the others:
'Now, brothers, who is going to lift this stone?'
Neither of them could so much as stir it, but as soon as he touched it,
away it flew to a distance, though it was ever so big--big as a hill.
And when he had flung the stone aside, he spoke a second time to his
brothers, saying:
'Who is going into the other world, to overcome the Norka?'
Neither of them offered to do so. Then he laughed at them for being such
cowards, and said:
'Well, brothers, farewell! Lower me into the other world, and don't go
away from here, but as soon as the cord is jerked, pull it up.'
His brothers lowered him accordingly, and when he had reached the other
world, underneath the earth, he went on his way. He walked and walked.
Presently he espied a horse with rich trappings, and it said to him:
'Hail, Prince Ivan! Long have I awaited thee!'
He mounted the horse and rode on--rode and rode, until he saw standing
before him a palace made of copper. He entered the courtyard, tied up
his horse, and went indoors. In one of the rooms a dinner was laid out.
He sat down and dined, and then went into a bedroom. There he found a
bed, on which he lay down to rest. Presently there came in a lady, more
beautiful than can be imagined anywhere but in a fairy tale, who said:
'Thou who art in my house, name thyself! If thou art an old man, thou
shalt be my father; if a middle-aged man, my brother; but if a young
man, thou shalt be my husband dear. And if thou art a woman, and an old
one, thou shalt be my grandmother; if middle-aged, my mother; and if a
girl, thou shalt be my own sister.'
Thereupon he came forth. And when she saw him she was delighted with
him, and said:
'Wherefore, O Prince Ivan--my husband dear shalt thou be!--wherefore
hast thou come hither?'
Then he told her all that had happened, and she said:
'That beast which thou wishest to overcome is my brother. He is staying
just now with my second sister, who lives not far from here in a silver
palace. I bound up three of the wounds which thou didst give him.'
Well, after this they drank, and enjoyed themselves, and held sweet
converse together, and then the Prince took leave of her, and went on to
the second sister, the one who lived in the silver palace, and with her
also he stayed awhile. She told him that her brother Norka was then at
her youngest sister's. So he went on to the youngest sister, who lived
in a golden palace. She told him that her brother was at that time
asleep on the blue sea, and she gave him a sword of steel and a draught
of the Water of Strength, and she told him to cut off her brother's head
at a single stroke. And when he had heard these things, he went his way.
And when the Prince came to the blue sea, he looked--there slept the
Norka on a stone in the middle of the sea; and when it snored, the water
was agitated for seven miles around. The Prince crossed himself, went
up to it, and smote it on the head with his sword. The head jumped off,
saying the while, 'Well, I'm done for now!' and rolled far away into the
sea.
After killing the beast, the Prince went back again, picking up all the
three sisters by the way, with the intention of taking them out into the
upper world: for they all loved him and would not be separated from
him. Each of them turned her palace into an egg--for they were all
enchantresses--and they taught him how to turn the eggs into palaces,
and back again, and they handed over the eggs to him. And then they
all went to the place from which they had to be hoisted into the upper
world. And when they came to where the rope was, the Prince took hold of
it and made the maidens fast to it. Then he jerked away at the rope and
his brothers began to haul it up. And when they had hauled it up, and
had set eyes on the wondrous maidens, they went aside and said: 'Let's
lower the rope, pull our brother part of the way up, and then cut the
rope. Perhaps he'll be killed; but then if he isn't, he'll never give us
these beauties as wives.'
So when they had agreed on this, they lowered the rope. But their
brother was no fool; he guessed what they were at, so he fastened the
rope to a stone, and then gave it a pull. His brothers hoisted the stone
to a great height, and then cut the rope. Down fell the stone and broke
in pieces; the Prince poured forth tears and went away. Well, he walked
and walked. Presently a storm arose; the lightning flashed, the thunder
roared, the rain fell in torrents. He went up to a tree in order to take
shelter under it, and on that tree he saw some young birds which were
being thoroughly drenched. So he took off his coat and covered them over
with it, and he himself sat down under the tree. Presently there came
flying a bird--such a big one that the light was blotted out by it. It
had been dark there before, but now it became darker still. Now this
was the mother of those small birds which the Prince had covered up.
And when the bird had come flying up, she perceived that her little ones
were covered over, and she said, 'Who has wrapped up my nestlings?' and
presently, seeing the Prince, she added: 'Didst thou do that? Thanks! In
return, ask of me anything thou desirest. I will do anything for thee.'
'Then carry me into the other world,' he replied.
'Make me a large vessel with a partition in the middle,' she said;
'catch all sorts of game, and put them into one half of it, and into the
other half pour water; so that there may be meat and drink for me.'
All this the Prince did. Then the bird--having taken the vessel on her
back, with the Prince sitting in the middle of it--began to fly. And
after flying some distance she brought him to his journey's end, took
leave of him, and flew away back. But he went to the house of a certain
tailor, and engaged himself as his servant. So much the worse for wear
was he, so thoroughly had he altered in appearance, that nobody would
have suspected him of being a Prince.
Having entered into the service of this master, the Prince began to
ask what was going on in that country. And his master replied: 'Our two
Princes--for the third one has disappeared--have brought away brides
from the other world, and want to marry them, but those brides refuse.
For they insist on having all their wedding-clothes made for them first,
exactly like those which they used to have in the other world, and that
without being measured for them. The King has called all the workmen
together, but not one of them will undertake to do it.'
The Prince, having heard all this, said, 'Go to the King, master, and
tell him that you will provide everything that's in your line.'
'However can I undertake to make clothes of that sort? I work for quite
common folks,' says his master.
'Go along, master! I will answer for everything,' says the Prince.
So the tailor went. The King was delighted that at least one good
workman had been found, and gave him as much money as ever he wanted.
When his tailor had settled everything, he went home. And the Prince
said to him:
'Now then, pray to God, and lie down to sleep; to-morrow all will be
ready.' And the tailor followed his lad's advice, and went to bed.
Midnight sounded. The Prince arose, went out of the city into the
fields, took out of his pocket the eggs which the maidens had given him,
and, as they had taught him, turned them into three palaces. Into each
of these he entered, took the maidens' robes, went out again, turned the
palaces back into eggs, and went home. And when he got there he hung up
the robes on the wall, and lay down to sleep.
Early in the morning his master awoke, and behold! there hung such
robes as he had never seen before, all shining with gold and silver and
precious stones. He was delighted, and he seized them and carried them
off to the King. When the Princesses saw that the clothes were those
which had been theirs in the other world, they guessed that Prince Ivan
was in this world, so they exchanged glances with each other, but they
held their peace. And the master, having handed over the clothes, went
home, but he no longer found his dear journeyman there. For the Prince
had gone to a shoemaker's, and him too he sent to work for the King; and
in the same way he went the round of all the artificers, and they all
proffered him thanks, inasmuch as through him they were enriched by the
King.
By the time the princely workman had gone the round of all the
artificers, the Princesses had received what they had asked for; all
their clothes were just like what they had been in the other world.
Then they wept bitterly because the Prince had not come, and it was
impossible for them to hold out any longer; it was necessary that
they should be married. But when they were ready for the wedding, the
youngest bride said to the King:
'Allow me, my father, to go and give alms to the beggars.'
He gave her leave, and she went and began bestowing alms upon them, and
examining them closely. And when she had come to one of them, and was
going to give him some money, she caught sight of the ring which she had
given to the Prince in the other world, and her sisters' rings too--for
it really was he. So she seized him by the hand, and brought him into
the hall, and said to the King:
'Here is he who brought us out of the other world. His brothers forbade
us to say that he was alive, threatening to slay us if we did.'
Then the King was wroth with those sons, and punished them as he thought
best. And afterwards three weddings were celebrated.

THE WONDERFUL BIRCH
ONCE upon a time there were a man and a woman, who had an only daughter.
Now it happened that one of their sheep went astray, and they set out to
look for it, and searched and searched, each in a different part of the
wood. Then the good wife met a witch, who said to her:
'If you spit, you miserable creature, if you spit into the sheath of my
knife, or if you run between my legs, I shall change you into a black
sheep.'
The woman neither spat, nor did she run between her legs, but yet the
witch changed her into a sheep. Then she made herself look exactly like
the woman, and called out to the good man:
'Ho, old man, halloa! I have found the sheep already!'
The man thought the witch was really his wife, and he did not know that
his wife was the sheep; so he went home with her, glad at heart because
his sheep was found. When they were safe at home the witch said to the
man:
'Look here, old man, we must really kill that sheep lest it run away to
the wood again.'
The man, who was a peaceable quiet sort of fellow, made no objections,
but simply said:
'Good, let us do so.'
The daughter, however, had overheard their talk, and she ran to the
flock and lamented aloud:
'Oh, dear little mother, they are going to slaughter you!'
'Well, then, if they do slaughter me,' was the black sheep's answer,
'eat you neither the meat nor the broth that is made of me, but gather
all my bones, and bury them by the edge of the field.'
Shortly after this they took the black sheep from the flock and
slaughtered it. The witch made pease-soup of it, and set it before the
daughter. But the girl remembered her mother's warning. She did not
touch the soup, but she carried the bones to the edge of the field and
buried them there; and there sprang up on the spot a birch tree--a very
lovely birch tree.
Some time had passed away--who can tell how long they might have been
living there?--when the witch, to whom a child had been born in the
meantime, began to take an ill-will to the man's daughter, and to
torment her in all sorts of ways.
Now it happened that a great festival was to be held at the palace, and
the King had commanded that all the people should be invited, and that
this proclamation should be made:

     'Come, people all!
     Poor and wretched, one and all!
     Blind and crippled though ye be,
     Mount your steeds or come by sea.'

And so they drove into the King's feast all the outcasts, and the
maimed, and the halt, and the blind. In the good man's house, too,
preparations were made to go to the palace. The witch said to the man:
'Go you on in front, old man, with our youngest; I will give the elder
girl work to keep her from being dull in our absence.'
So the man took the child and set out. But the witch kindled a fire on
the hearth, threw a potful of barleycorns among the cinders, and said to
the girl:
'If you have not picked the barley out of the ashes, and put it all back
in the pot before nightfall, I shall eat you up!'
Then she hastened after the others, and the poor girl stayed at home and
wept. She tried to be sure to pick up the grains of barley, but she soon
saw how useless her labour was; and so she went in her sore trouble to
the birch tree on her mother's grave, and cried and cried, because her
mother lay dead beneath the sod and could help her no longer. In the
midst of her grief she suddenly heard her mother's voice speak from the
grave, and say to her:
'Why do you weep, little daughter?'
'The witch has scattered barleycorns on the hearth, and bid me pick
them out of the ashes,' said the girl; 'that is why I weep, dear little
mother.'
'Do not weep,' said her mother consolingly. 'Break off one of my
branches, and strike the hearth with it crosswise, and all will be put
right.' The girl did so. She struck the hearth with the birchen branch,
and lo! the barleycorns flew into the pot, and the hearth was clean.
Then she went back to the birch tree and laid the branch upon the grave.
Then her mother bade her bathe on one side of the stem, dry herself on
another, and dress on the third. When the girl had done all that, she
had grown so lovely that no one on earth could rival her. Splendid
clothing was given to her, and a horse, with hair partly of gold, partly
of silver, and partly of something more precious still. The girl sprang
into the saddle, and rode as swift as an arrow to the palace. As she
turned into the courtyard of the castle the King's son came out to meet
her, tied her steed to a pillar, and led her in. He never left her side
as they passed through the castle rooms; and all the people gazed at
her, and wondered who the lovely maiden was, and from what castle
she came; but no one knew her--no one knew anything about her. At the
banquet the Prince invited her to sit next him in the place of honour;
but the witch's daughter gnawed the bones under the table. The Prince
did not see her, and thinking it was a dog, he gave her such a push
with his foot that her arm was broken. Are you not sorry for the witch's
daughter? It was not her fault that her mother was a witch.
Towards evening the good man's daughter thought it was time to go home;
but as she went, her ring caught on the latch of the door, for the
King's son had had it smeared with tar. She did not take time to pull it
off, but, hastily unfastening her horse from the pillar, she rode away
beyond the castle walls as swift as an arrow. Arrived at home, she took
off her clothes by the birch tree, left her horse standing there, and
hastened to her place behind the stove. In a short time the man and the
woman came home again too, and the witch said to the girl:
'Ah! you poor thing, there you are to be sure! You don't know what fine
times we have had at the palace! The King's son carried my daughter
about, but the poor thing fell and broke her arm.'
The girl knew well how matters really stood, but she pretended to know
nothing about it, and sat dumb behind the stove.
The next day they were invited again to the King's banquet.
'Hey! old man,' said the witch, 'get on your clothes as quick as you
can; we are bidden to the feast. Take you the child; I will give the
other one work, lest she weary.'
She kindled the fire, threw a potful of hemp seed among the ashes, and
said to the girl:
'If you do not get this sorted, and all the seed back into the pot, I
shall kill you!'
The girl wept bitterly; then she went to the birch tree, washed herself
on one side of it and dried herself on the other; and this time still
finer clothes were given to her, and a very beautiful steed. She broke
off a branch of the birch tree, struck the hearth with it, so that the
seeds flew into the pot, and then hastened to the castle.
Again the King's son came out to meet her, tied her horse to a pillar,
and led her into the banqueting hall. At the feast the girl sat next him
in the place of honour, as she had done the day before. But the witch's
daughter gnawed bones under the table, and the Prince gave her a push
by mistake, which broke her leg--he had never noticed her crawling about
among the people's feet. She was VERY unlucky!
The good man's daughter hastened home again betimes, but the King's son
had smeared the door-posts with tar, and the girl's golden circlet stuck
to it. She had not time to look for it, but sprang to the saddle and
rode like an arrow to the birch tree. There she left her horse and her
fine clothes, and said to her mother:
'I have lost my circlet at the castle; the door-post was tarred, and it
stuck fast.'
'And even had you lost two of them,' answered her mother, 'I would give
you finer ones.'
Then the girl hastened home, and when her father came home from the
feast with the witch, she was in her usual place behind the stove. Then
the witch said to her:
'You poor thing! what is there to see here compared with what WE have
seen at the palace? The King's son carried my daughter from one room to
another; he let her fall, 'tis true, and my child's foot was broken.'
The man's daughter held her peace all the time, and busied herself about
the hearth.
The night passed, and when the day began to dawn, the witch awakened her
husband, crying:
'Hi! get up, old man! We are bidden to the royal banquet.'
So the old man got up. Then the witch gave him the child, saying:
'Take you the little one; I will give the other girl work to do, else
she will weary at home alone.'
She did as usual. This time it was a dish of milk she poured upon the
ashes, saying:
'If you do not get all the milk into the dish again before I come home,
you will suffer for it.'
How frightened the girl was this time! She ran to the birch tree, and by
its magic power her task was accomplished; and then she rode away to
the palace as before. When she got to the courtyard she found the
Prince waiting for her. He led her into the hall, where she was highly
honoured; but the witch's daughter sucked the bones under the table, and
crouching at the people's feet she got an eye knocked out, poor thing!
Now no one knew any more than before about the good man's daughter, no
one knew whence she came; but the Prince had had the threshold smeared
with tar, and as she fled her gold slippers stuck to it. She reached the
birch tree, and laying aside her finery, she said:
'Alas I dear little mother, I have lost my gold slippers!'
'Let them be,' was her mother's reply; 'if you need them I shall give
you finer ones.'
Scarcely was she in her usual place behind the stove when her father
came home with the witch. Immediately the witch began to mock her,
saying:
'Ah! you poor thing, there is nothing for you to see here, and WE--ah:
what great things we have seen at the palace! My little girl was carried
about again, but had the ill-luck to fall and get her eye knocked out.
You stupid thing, you, what do you know about anything?'
'Yes, indeed, what can I know?' replied the girl; 'I had enough to do to
get the hearth clean.'
Now the Prince had kept all the things the girl had lost, and he soon
set about finding the owner of them. For this purpose a great banquet
was given on the fourth day, and all the people were invited to the
palace. The witch got ready to go too. She tied a wooden beetle on where
her child's foot should have been, a log of wood instead of an arm, and
stuck a bit of dirt in the empty socket for an eye, and took the child
with her to the castle. When all the people were gathered together, the
King's son stepped in among the crowd and cried:
'The maiden whose finger this ring slips over, whose head this golden
hoop encircles, and whose foot this shoe fits, shall be my bride.'
What a great trying on there was now among them all! The things would
fit no one, however.
'The cinder wench is not here,' said the Prince at last; 'go and fetch
her, and let her try on the things.'
So the girl was fetched, and the Prince was just going to hand the
ornaments to her, when the witch held him back, saying:
'Don't give them to her; she soils everything with cinders; give them to
my daughter rather.'
Well, then the Prince gave the witch's daughter the ring, and the woman
filed and pared away at her daughter's finger till the ring fitted. It
was the same with the circlet and the shoes of gold. The witch would
not allow them to be handed to the cinder wench; she worked at her own
daughter's head and feet till she got the things forced on. What was to
be done now? The Prince had to take the witch's daughter for his bride
whether he would or no; he sneaked away to her father's house with
her, however, for he was ashamed to hold the wedding festivities at the
palace with so strange a bride. Some days passed, and at last he had to
take his bride home to the palace, and he got ready to do so. Just as
they were taking leave, the kitchen wench sprang down from her place by
the stove, on the pretext of fetching something from the cowhouse, and
in going by she whispered in the Prince's ear as he stood in the yard:
'Alas! dear Prince, do not rob me of my silver and my gold.'
Thereupon the King's son recognised the cinder wench; so he took both
the girls with him, and set out. After they had gone some little way
they came to the bank of a river, and the Prince threw the witch's
daughter across to serve as a bridge, and so got over with the cinder
wench. There lay the witch's daughter then, like a bridge over the
river, and could not stir, though her heart was consumed with grief. No
help was near, so she cried at last in her anguish:
'May there grow a golden hemlock out of my body! perhaps my mother will
know me by that token.'
Scarcely had she spoken when a golden hemlock sprang up from her, and
stood upon the bridge.
Now, as soon as the Prince had got rid of the witch's daughter he
greeted the cinder wench as his bride, and they wandered together to the
birch tree which grew upon the mother's grave. There they received all
sorts of treasures and riches, three sacks full of gold, and as much
silver, and a splendid steed, which bore them home to the palace. There
they lived a long time together, and the young wife bore a son to the
Prince. Immediately word was brought to the witch that her daughter
had borne a son--for they all believed the young King's wife to be the
witch's daughter.
'So, so,' said the witch to herself; 'I had better away with my gift for
the infant, then.'
And so saying she set out. Thus it happened that she came to the bank of
the river, and there she saw the beautiful golden hemlock growing in the
middle of the bridge, and when she began to cut it down to take to her
grandchild, she heard a voice moaning:
'Alas! dear mother, do not cut me so!'
'Are you here?' demanded the witch.
'Indeed I am, dear little mother,' answered the daughter 'They threw me
across the river to make a bridge of me.'
In a moment the witch had the bridge shivered to atoms, and then she
hastened away to the palace. Stepping up to the young Queen's bed, she
began to try her magic arts upon her, saying:
'Spit, you wretch, on the blade of my knife; bewitch my knife's blade
for me, and I shall change you into a reindeer of the forest.'
'Are you there again to bring trouble upon me?' said the young woman.
She neither spat nor did anything else, but still the witch changed her
into a reindeer, and smuggled her own daughter into her place as the
Prince's wife. But now the child grew restless and cried, because it
missed its mother's care. They took it to the court, and tried to pacify
it in every conceivable way, but its crying never ceased.
'What makes the child so restless?' asked the Prince, and he went to a
wise widow woman to ask her advice.
'Ay, ay, your own wife is not at home,' said the widow woman; 'she is
living like a reindeer in the wood; you have the witch's daughter for a
wife now, and the witch herself for a mother-in-law.'
'Is there any way of getting my own wife back from the wood again?'
asked the Prince.
'Give me the child,' answered the widow woman. 'I'll take it with me
to-morrow when I go to drive the cows to the wood. I'll make a rustling
among the birch leaves and a trembling among the aspens--perhaps the boy
will grow quiet when he hears it.'
'Yes, take the child away, take it to the wood with you to quiet it,'
said the Prince, and led the widow woman into the castle.
'How now? you are going to send the child away to the wood?' said the
witch in a suspicious tone, and tried to interfere.
But the King's son stood firm by what he had commanded, and said:
'Carry the child about the wood; perhaps that will pacify it.'
So the widow woman took the child to the wood. She came to the edge of
a marsh, and seeing a herd of reindeer there, she began all at once to
sing--
     'Little Bright-eyes, little Redskin,
     Come nurse the child you bore!
       That bloodthirsty monster,
       That man-eater grim,
     Shall nurse him, shall tend him no more.
       They may threaten and force as they will,
       He turns from her, shrinks from her still,'
and immediately the reindeer drew near, and nursed and tended the child
the whole day long; but at nightfall it had to follow the herd, and said
to the widow woman:
'Bring me the child to-morrow, and again the following day; after that I
must wander with the herd far away to other lands.'
The following morning the widow woman went back to the castle to fetch
the child. The witch interfered, of course, but the Prince said:
'Take it, and carry it about in the open air; the boy is quieter at
night, to be sure, when he has been in the wood all day.'
So the widow took the child in her arms, and carried it to the marsh in
the forest. There she sang as on the preceding day--
     'Little Bright-eyes, little Redskin,
     Come nurse the child you bore!
       That bloodthirsty monster,
       That man-eater grim,
     Shall nurse him, shall tend him no more.
       They may threaten and force as they will,
       He turns from her, shrinks from her still,'
and immediately the reindeer left the herd and came to the child, and
tended it as on the day before. And so it was that the child throve,
till not a finer boy was to be seen anywhere. But the King's son had
been pondering over all these things, and he said to the widow woman:
'Is there no way of changing the reindeer into a human being again?'
'I don't rightly know,' was her answer. 'Come to the wood with me,
however; when the woman puts off her reindeer skin I shall comb her head
for her; whilst I am doing so you must burn the skin.'
Thereupon they both went to the wood with the child; scarcely were they
there when the reindeer appeared and nursed the child as before. Then
the widow woman said to the reindeer:
'Since you are going far away to-morrow, and I shall not see you again,
let me comb your head for the last time, as a remembrance of you.'
Good; the young woman stript off the reindeer skin, and let the widow
woman do as she wished. In the meantime the King's son threw the
reindeer skin into the fire unobserved.
'What smells of singeing here?' asked the young woman, and looking round
she saw her own husband. 'Woe is me! you have burnt my skin. Why did you
do that?'
'To give you back your human form again.'
'Alack-a-day! I have nothing to cover me now, poor creature that I am!'
cried the young woman, and transformed herself first into a distaff,
then into a wooden beetle, then into a spindle, and into all imaginable
shapes. But all these shapes the King's son went on destroying till she
stood before him in human form again.
Alas! wherefore take me home with you again,' cried the young woman,
'since the witch is sure to eat me up?'
'She will not eat you up,' answered her husband; and they started for
home with the child.
But when the witch wife saw them she ran away with her daughter, and if
she has not stopped she is running still, though at a great age. And the
Prince, and his wife, and the baby lived happy ever afterwards.(9)


