When she came to the top, she found herself in a little square place,
with three doors, two opposite each other, and one opposite the top of
the stair.  She stood for a moment, without an idea in her little head
what to do next.  But as she stood, she began to hear a curious humming
sound.  Could it be the rain?  No.  It was much more gentle, and even
monotonous than the sound of the rain, which now she scarcely heard.
The low sweet humming sound went on, sometimes stopping for a little
while and then beginning again.  It was more like the hum of a very
happy bee that had found a rich well of honey in some globular flower,
than anything else I can think of at this moment.  Where could it come
from?  She laid her ear first to one of the doors to hearken if it was
there--then to another.  When she laid her ear against the third door,
there could be no doubt where it came from: it must be from something
in that room.  What could it be?  She was rather afraid, but her
curiosity was stronger than her fear, and she opened the door very
gently and peeped in.  What do you think she saw?  A very old lady who
sat spinning.
Perhaps you will wonder how the princess could tell that the old lady
was an old lady, when I inform you that not only was she beautiful, but
her skin was smooth and white.  I will tell you more.  Her hair was
combed back from her forehead and face, and hung loose far down and all
over her back.  That is not much like an old lady--is it?  Ah! but it
was white almost as snow.  And although her face was so smooth, her
eyes looked so wise that you could not have helped seeing she must be
old.  The princess, though she could not have told you why, did think
her very old indeed--quite fifty, she said to herself.  But she was
rather older than that, as you shall hear.
While the princess stared bewildered, with her head just inside the
door, the old lady lifted hers, and said, in a sweet, but old and
rather shaky voice, which mingled very pleasantly with the continued
hum of her wheel:
'Come in, my dear; come in.  I am glad to see you.'
That the princess was a real princess you might see now quite plainly;
for she didn't hang on to the handle of the door, and stare without
moving, as I have known some do who ought to have been princesses but
were only rather vulgar little girls.  She did as she was told, stepped
inside the door at once, and shut it gently behind her.
'Come to me, my dear,' said the old lady.
And again the princess did as she was told.  She approached the old
lady--rather slowly, I confess--but did not stop until she stood by her
side, and looked up in her face with her blue eyes and the two melted
stars in them.
'Why, what have you been doing with your eyes, child?' asked the old
lady.
'Crying,' answered the princess.
'Why, child?'
'Because I couldn't find my way down again.'
'But you could find your way up.'
'Not at first--not for a long time.'
'But your face is streaked like the back of a zebra.  Hadn't you a
handkerchief to wipe your eyes with?'
'No.'
'Then why didn't you come to me to wipe them for you?'
'Please, I didn't know you were here.  I will next time.'
'There's a good child!' said the old lady.
Then she stopped her wheel, and rose, and, going out of the room,
returned with a little silver basin and a soft white towel, with which
she washed and wiped the bright little face.  And the princess thought
her hands were so smooth and nice!
When she carried away the basin and towel, the little princess wondered
to see how straight and tall she was, for, although she was so old, she
didn't stoop a bit.  She was dressed in black velvet with thick white
heavy-looking lace about it; and on the black dress her hair shone like
silver.  There was hardly any more furniture in the room than there
might have been in that of the poorest old woman who made her bread by
her spinning.  There was no carpet on the floor--no table
anywhere--nothing but the spinning-wheel and the chair beside it.  When
she came back, she sat down and without a word began her spinning once
more, while Irene, who had never seen a spinning-wheel, stood by her
side and looked on.  When the old lady had got her thread fairly going
again, she said to the princess, but without looking at her:
'Do you know my name, child?'
'No, I don't know it,' answered the princess.
'My name is Irene.'
'That's my name!' cried the princess.
'I know that.  I let you have mine.  I haven't got your name. You've
got mine.'
'How can that be?' asked the princess, bewildered.  'I've always had my
name.'
'Your papa, the king, asked me if I had any objection to your having
it; and, of course, I hadn't.  I let you have it with pleasure.'
'It was very kind of you to give me your name--and such a pretty one,'
said the princess.
'Oh, not so very kind!' said the old lady.  'A name is one of those
things one can give away and keep all the same.  I have a good many
such things.  Wouldn't you like to know who I am, child?'
'Yes, that I should--very much.'
'I'm your great-great-grandmother,' said the lady.
'What's that?' asked the princess.
'I'm your father's mother's father's mother.'
'Oh, dear! I can't understand that,' said the princess.
'I dare say not.  I didn't expect you would.  But that's no reason why
I shouldn't say it.'
'Oh, no!' answered the princess.
'I will explain it all to you when you are older,' the lady went on.
'But you will be able to understand this much now: I came here to take
care of you.'
'Is it long since you came?  Was it yesterday?  Or was it today,
because it was so wet that I couldn't get out?'
'I've been here ever since you came yourself.'
'What a long time!' said the princess.  'I don't remember it at all.'
'No.  I suppose not.'
'But I never saw you before.'
'No.  But you shall see me again.'
'Do you live in this room always?'
'I don't sleep in it.  I sleep on the opposite side of the landing. I
sit here most of the day.'
'I shouldn't like it.  My nursery is much prettier.  You must be a
queen too, if you are my great big grand-mother.'
'Yes, I am a queen.'
'Where is your crown, then?' 'In my bedroom.'
'I should like to see it.'
'You shall some day--not today.'
'I wonder why nursie never told me.'
'Nursie doesn't know.  She never saw me.'
'But somebody knows that you are in the house?'
'No; nobody.'
'How do you get your dinner, then?'
'I keep poultry--of a sort.'
'Where do you keep them?'
'I will show you.'
'And who makes the chicken broth for you?'
'I never kill any of MY chickens.'
'Then I can't understand.'
'What did you have for breakfast this morning?' asked the lady.
'Oh! I had bread and milk, and an egg--I dare say you eat their eggs.'
'Yes, that's it.  I eat their eggs.'
'Is that what makes your hair so white?'
'No, my dear.  It's old age.  I am very old.'
'I thought so.  Are you fifty?'
'Yes--more than that.'
'Are you a hundred?'
'Yes--more than that.  I am too old for you to guess.  Come and see my
chickens.'
Again she stopped her spinning.  She rose, took the princess by the
hand, led her out of the room, and opened the door opposite the stair.
The princess expected to see a lot of hens and chickens, but instead of
that, she saw the blue sky first, and then the roofs of the house, with
a multitude of the loveliest pigeons, mostly white, but of all colours,
walking about, making bows to each other, and talking a language she
could not understand.  She clapped her hands with delight, and up rose
such a flapping of wings that she in her turn was startled.
'You've frightened my poultry,' said the old lady, smiling.
'And they've frightened me,' said the princess, smiling too.  'But what
very nice poultry!  Are the eggs nice?'
'Yes, very nice.' 'What a small egg-spoon you must have!  Wouldn't it
be better to keep hens, and get bigger eggs?'
'How should I feed them, though?'
'I see,' said the princess.  'The pigeons feed themselves.  They've got
wings.'
'Just so.  If they couldn't fly, I couldn't eat their eggs.'
'But how do you get at the eggs?  Where are their nests?'
The lady took hold of a little loop of string in the wall at the side
of the door and, lifting a shutter, showed a great many pigeon-holes
with nests, some with young ones and some with eggs in them.  The birds
came in at the other side, and she took out the eggs on this side.  She
closed it again quickly, lest the young ones should be frightened.
'Oh, what a nice way!' cried the princess.  'Will you give me an egg to
eat?  I'm rather hungry.'
'I will some day, but now you must go back, or nursie will be miserable
about you.  I dare say she's looking for you everywhere.'
'Except here,' answered the princess.  'Oh, how surprised she will be
when I tell her about my great big grand-grand-mother!'
'Yes, that she will!' said the old lady with a curious smile. 'Mind you
tell her all about it exactly.'
'That I will.  Please will you take me back to her?'
'I can't go all the way, but I will take you to the top of the stair,
and then you must run down quite fast into your own room.'
The little princess put her hand in the old lady's, who, looking this
way and that, brought her to the top of the first stair, and thence to
the bottom of the second, and did not leave her till she saw her
half-way down the third.  When she heard the cry of her nurse's
pleasure at finding her, she turned and walked up the stairs again,
very fast indeed for such a very great grandmother, and sat down to her
spinning with another strange smile on her sweet old face.
About this spinning of hers I will tell you more another time.
Guess what she was spinning.
What the Nurse Thought of It
'Why, where can you have been, princess?' asked the nurse, taking her
in her arms.  'It's very unkind of you to hide away so long. I began to
be afraid--'  Here she checked herself.
'What were you afraid of, nursie?' asked the princess.
'Never mind,' she answered.  'Perhaps I will tell you another day. Now
tell me where you have been.'
'I've been up a long way to see my very great, huge, old grandmother,'
said the princess.
'What do you mean by that?' asked the nurse, who thought she was making
fun.
'I mean that I've been a long way up and up to see My GREAT
grandmother.  Ah, nursie, you don't know what a beautiful mother of
grandmothers I've got upstairs.  She is such an old lady, with such
lovely white hair--as white as my silver cup.  Now, when I think of it,
I think her hair must be silver.'
'What nonsense you are talking, princess!' said the nurse.
'I'm not talking nonsense,' returned Irene, rather offended.  'I will
tell you all about her.  She's much taller than you, and much prettier.'
'Oh, I dare say!' remarked the nurse.
'And she lives upon pigeons' eggs.'
'Most likely,' said the nurse.
'And she sits in an empty room, spin-spinning all day long.'
'Not a doubt of it,' said the nurse.
'And she keeps her crown in her bedroom.'
'Of course--quite the proper place to keep her crown in.  She wears it
in bed, I'll be bound.'
'She didn't say that.  And I don't think she does.  That wouldn't be
comfortable--would it?  I don't think my papa wears his crown for a
night-cap.  Does he, nursie?'
'I never asked him.  I dare say he does.'
'And she's been there ever since I came here--ever so many years.'
'Anybody could have told you that,' said the nurse, who did not believe
a word Irene was saying.
'Why didn't you tell me, then?'
'There was no necessity.  You could make it all up for yourself.'
'You don't believe me, then!' exclaimed the princess, astonished and
angry, as she well might be.
'Did you expect me to believe you, princess?' asked the nurse coldly.
'I know princesses are in the habit of telling make-believes, but you
are the first I ever heard of who expected to have them believed,' she
added, seeing that the child was strangely in earnest.
The princess burst into tears.
'Well, I must say,' remarked the nurse, now thoroughly vexed with her
for crying, 'it is not at all becoming in a princess to tell stories
and expect to be believed just because she is a princess.'
'But it's quite true, I tell you.'
'You've dreamt it, then, child.'
'No, I didn't dream it.  I went upstairs, and I lost myself, and if I
hadn't found the beautiful lady, I should never have found myself.'
'Oh, I dare say!'
'Well, you just come up with me, and see if I'm not telling the truth.'
'Indeed I have other work to do.  It's your dinnertime, and I won't
have any more such nonsense.'
The princess wiped her eyes, and her face grew so hot that they were
soon quite dry.  She sat down to her dinner, but ate next to nothing.
Not to be believed does not at all agree with princesses: for a real
princess cannot tell a lie.  So all the afternoon she did not speak a
word.  Only when the nurse spoke to her, she answered her, for a real
princess is never rude--even when she does well to be offended.
Of course the nurse was not comfortable in her mind--not that she
suspected the least truth in Irene's story, but that she loved her
dearly, and was vexed with herself for having been cross to her. She
thought her crossness was the cause of the princess's unhappiness, and
had no idea that she was really and deeply hurt at not being believed.
But, as it became more and more plain during the evening in her every
motion and look, that, although she tried to amuse herself with her
toys, her heart was too vexed and troubled to enjoy them, her nurse's
discomfort grew and grew.  When bedtime came, she undressed and laid
her down, but the child, instead of holding up her little mouth to be
kissed, turned away from her and lay still.  Then nursie's heart gave
way altogether, and she began to cry.  At the sound of her first sob
the princess turned again, and held her face to kiss her as usual.  But
the nurse had her handkerchief to her eyes, and did not see the
movement.
'Nursie,' said the princess, 'why won't you believe me?'
'Because I can't believe you,' said the nurse, getting angry again.
'Ah! then, you can't help it,' said Irene, 'and I will not be vexed
with you any more.  I will give you a kiss and go to sleep.'
'You little angel!' cried the nurse, and caught her out of bed, and
walked about the room with her in her arms, kissing and hugging her.
'You will let me take you to see my dear old great big grandmother,
won't you?' said the princess, as she laid her down again.
'And you won't say I'm ugly, any more--will you, princess?' 'Nursie, I
never said you were ugly.  What can you mean?'
'Well, if you didn't say it, you meant it.'
'Indeed, I never did.'
'You said I wasn't so pretty as that--'
'As my beautiful grandmother--yes, I did say that; and I say it again,
for it's quite true.'
'Then I do think you are unkind!' said the nurse, and put her
handkerchief to her eyes again.
'Nursie, dear, everybody can't be as beautiful as every other body, you
know.  You are very nice-looking, but if you had been as beautiful as
my grandmother--'
'Bother your grandmother!' said the nurse.
'Nurse, that's very rude.  You are not fit to be spoken to till you can
behave better.'
The princess turned away once more, and again the nurse was ashamed of
herself.
'I'm sure I beg your pardon, princess,' she said, though still in an
offended tone.  But the princess let the tone pass, and heeded only the
words.
'You won't say it again, I am sure,' she answered, once more turning
towards her nurse.  'I was only going to say that if you had been twice
as nice-looking as you are, some king or other would have married you,
and then what would have become of me?'
'You are an angel!' repeated the nurse, again embracing her. 'Now,'
insisted Irene, 'you will come and see my grandmother--won't you?'
'I will go with you anywhere you like, my cherub,' she answered; and in
two minutes the weary little princess was fast asleep.





