
In the old times there was a half fool living in Dunmore, in the county
Galway, and though he was excessively fond of music, he was unable to
learn more than one tune, and that was the "Black Rogue." He used to get
a good deal of money from the gentlemen, for they used to get sport out
of him. One night the Piper was coming home from a house where there had
been a dance, and he half drunk. When he came up to a little bridge that
was by his mother's house, he squeezed the pipes on, and began playing
the "Black Rogue." The Puca came behind him, and flung him on his own
back. There were long horns on the Puca, and the Piper got a good grip
of them, and then he said:
"Destruction on you, you nasty beast; let me home. I have a
tenpenny-piece in my pocket for my mother, and she wants snuff."
"Never mind your mother," said the Puca, "but keep your hold. If you
fall, you will break your neck and your pipes." Then the Puca said to
him, "Play up for me the 'Shan Van Vocht.'"
"I don't know it," said the Piper.
"Never mind whether you do or you don't," said the Puca. "Play up, and
I'll make you know."
The Piper put wind in his bag, and he played such music as made himself
wonder.
"Upon my word, you're a fine music-master," says the Piper, then; "but
tell me where you're for bringing me."
"There's a great feast in the house of the Banshee, on the top of Croagh
Patric, to-night," says the Puca, "and I'm for bringing you there to
play music, and, take my word, you'll get the price of your trouble."
"By my word, you'll save me a journey, then," says the Piper, "for
Father William put a journey to Croagh Patric on me because I stole the
white gander from him last Martinmas."
The Puca rushed him across hills and bogs and rough places, till he
brought him to the top of Croagh Patric.
Then the Puca struck three blows with his foot, and a great door opened
and they passed in together into a fine room.
The Piper saw a golden table in the middle of the room, and hundreds of
old women sitting round about it.
The old women rose up, and said, "A hundred thousand welcomes to you,
you Puca of November. Who is this you have with you?"
"The best Piper in Ireland," says the Puca.
One of the old women struck a blow on the ground, and a door opened in
the side of the wall, and what should the Piper see coming out but the
white gander which he had stolen from Father William.
"By my conscience, then," says the Piper, "myself and my mother ate
every taste of that gander, only one wing, and I gave that to Red Mary,
and it's she told the priest I stole his gander."
The gander cleaned the table, and carried it away, and the Puca said,
"Play up music for these ladies."
The Piper played up, and the old women began dancing, and they were
dancing till they were tired. Then the Puca said to pay the Piper, and
every old woman drew out a gold piece and gave it to him.
"By the tooth of Patric," says he, "I'm as rich as the son of a lord."
"Come with me," says the Puca, "and I'll bring you home."
They went out then, and just as he was going to ride on the Puca, the
gander came up to him and gave him a new set of pipes.
The Puca was not long until he brought him to Dunmore, and he threw the
Piper off at the little bridge, and then he told him to go home, and
says to him, "You have two things now that you never had before--you
have sense and music." The Piper went home, and he knocked at his
mother's door, saying, "Let me in, I'm as rich as a lord, and I'm the
best Piper in Ireland."
"You're drunk," says the mother.
"No, indeed," says the Piper, "I haven't drunk a drop."
The mother let him in, and he gave her the gold pieces, and, "Wait now,"
says he, "till you hear the music I'll play."
He buckled on the pipes, but instead of music there came a sound as if
all the geese and ganders in Ireland were screeching together. He
wakened the neighbours, and they were all mocking him, until he put on
the old pipes, and then he played melodious music for them; and after
that he told them all he had gone through that night.
The next morning, when his mother went to look at the gold pieces, there
was nothing there but the leaves of a plant.
The piper went to the priest and told him his story, but the priest
would not believe a word from him, until he put the pipes on him, and
then the screeching of the ganders and the geese began.
"Leave my sight, you thief," says the priest.
But nothing would do the Piper till he put the old pipes on him to show
the priest that his story was true.
He buckled on the old pipes, and he played melodious music, and from
that day till the day of his death there was never a Piper in the county
Galway was as good as he was.


