
"Terence Mooney was an honest boy and well to do; an' he rinted the
biggest farm on this side iv the Galties; an' bein' mighty cute an' a
sevare worker, it was small wonder he turned a good penny every harvest.
But, unluckily, he was blessed with an ilegant large family iv
daughters, an' iv coorse, his heart was allamost bruck, striving to make
up fortunes for the whole of them. An' there wasn't a conthrivance iv
any soart or description for makin' money out iv the farm but he was up
to.
"Well, among the other ways he had iv gettin' up in the world he always
kep a power iv turkeys, and all soarts iv poultrey; an' he was out iv
all rason partial to geese--an' small blame to him for that same--for
twice't a year you can pluck them as bare as my hand--an' get a fine
price for the feathers, an' plenty of rale sizable eggs--an' when they
are too ould to lay any more, you can kill them, an' sell them to the
gintlemen for goslings, d'ye see, let alone that a goose is the most
manly bird that is out.
"Well, it happened in the coorse iv time that one ould gandher tuck a
wondherful likin' to Terence, an' divil a place he could go serenadin'
about the farm, or lookin' afther the men, but the gandher id be at his
heels, an' rubbin' himself agin his legs, an' lookin' up in his face
jist like any other Christian id do; an', begorra, the likes iv it was
never seen--Terence Mooney an' the gandher wor so great.
"An' at last the bird was so engagin' that Terence would not allow it to
be plucked any more, an' kep it from that time out for love an'
affection--just all as one like one iv his childer.
"But happiness in perfection never lasts long, an' the neighbours
begin'd to suspect the nathur an' intentions iv the gandher, an' some iv
them said it was the divil, an' more iv them that it was a fairy.
"Well, Terence could not but hear something of what was sayin', an' you
may be sure he was not altogether asy in his mind about it, an' from one
day to another he was gettin' more ancomfortable in himself, until he
detarmined to sind for Jer Garvan, the fairy docthor, in Garryowen, an'
it's he was the illigant hand at the business, an' divil a sperit id say
a crass word to him, no more nor a priest. An', moreover, he was very
great wid ould Terence Mooney--this man's father that was.
"So without more about it he was sint for, an', sure enough, the divil a
long he was about it, for he kem back that very evenin' along wid the
boy that was sint for him, an' as soon as he was there, an' tuck his
supper, an' was done talkin' for a while, he begin'd, of coorse, to look
into the gandher.
"Well, he turned it this away an' that away, to the right an' to the
left, an' straight-ways an' upside-down, an' when he was tired handlin'
it, says he to Terence Mooney:
"'Terence,' says he, 'you must remove the bird into the next room,' says
he, 'an' put a petticoat,' says he, 'or anny other convaynience round
his head,' says he.
"'An' why so?' says Terence.
"'Becase,' says Jer, says he.
"'Becase what?' says Terence.
"'Becase,' says Jer, 'if it isn't done you'll never be asy agin,' says
he, 'or pusillanimous in your mind,' says he; 'so ax no more questions,
but do my biddin',' says he.
"'Well,' says Terence, 'have your own way,' says he.
"An' wid that he tuck the ould gandher an' giv' it to one iv the
gossoons.
"'An' take care,' says he, 'don't smother the crathur,' says he.
"Well, as soon as the bird was gone, says Jer Garvan, says he:
"'Do you know what that old gandher _is_, Terence Mooney?'
"'Divil a taste,' says Terence.
"'Well, then,' says Jer, 'the gandher is your own father,' says he.
"'It's jokin' you are,' says Terence, turnin' mighty pale; 'how can an
ould gandher be my father?' says he.
"'I'm not funnin' you at all,' says Jer; 'it's thrue what I tell you,
it's your father's wandhrin' sowl,' says he, 'that's naturally tuck
pissession iv the ould gandher's body,' says he. 'I know him many ways,
and I wondher,' says he, 'you do not know the cock iv his eye yourself,'
says he.
"'Oh, blur an' ages!' says Terence, 'what the divil will I ever do at
all at all,' says he; 'it's all over wid me, for I plucked him twelve
times at the laste,' says he.
"'That can't be helped now,' says Jer; 'it was a sevare act, surely,'
says he, 'but it's too late to lamint for it now,' says he; 'the only
way to prevint what's past,' says he, 'is to put a stop to it before it
happens,' says he.
"'Thrue for you,' says Terence, 'but how the divil did you come to the
knowledge iv my father's sowl,' says he, 'bein' in the ould gandher,'
says he.
"'If I tould you,' says Jer, 'you would not undherstand me,' says he,
'without book-larnin' an' gasthronomy,' says he; 'so ax me no
questions,' says he, 'an' I'll tell you no lies. But b'lieve me in this
much,' says he, 'it's your father that's in it,' says he; 'an' if I
don't make him spake to-morrow mornin',' says he, 'I'll give you lave to
call me a fool,' says he.
"'Say no more,' says Terence; 'that settles the business,' says he; 'an'
oh, blur and ages! is it not a quare thing,' says he, 'for a dacent,
respictable man,' says he, 'to be walkin' about the counthry in the
shape iv an ould gandher,' says he; 'and oh, murdher, murdher! is not
it often I plucked him,' says he, 'an' tundher and ouns! might not I
have ate him?' says he; and wid that he fell into a could parspiration,
savin' your prisince, an' on the pint iv faintin' wid the bare notions
iv it.
"Well, whin he was come to himself agin, says Jerry to him, quite an'
asy:
"'Terence,' says he, 'don't be aggravatin' yourself,' says he; 'for I
have a plan composed that 'ill make him spake out,' says he, 'an' tell
what it is in the world he's wantin',' says he; 'an' mind an' don't be
comin' in wid your gosther, an' to say agin anything I tell you,' says
he, 'but jist purtind, as soon as the bird is brought back,' says he,
'how that we're goin' to sind him to-morrow mornin' to market,' says he.
'An' if he don't spake to-night,' says he, 'or gother himself out iv the
place,' says he, 'put him into the hamper airly, and sind him in the
cart,' says he, 'straight to Tipperary, to be sould for ating,' says he,
'along wid the two gossoons,' says he, 'an' my name isn't Jer Garvan,'
says he, 'if he doesn't spake out before he's half-way,' says he. 'An'
mind,' says he, 'as soon as iver he says the first word,' says he, 'that
very minute bring him aff to Father Crotty,' says he; 'an' if his
raverince doesn't make him ratire,' says he, 'like the rest iv his
parishioners, glory be to God,' says he, 'into the siclusion iv the
flames iv purgathory,' says he, 'there's no vartue in my charums,' says
he.
"Well, wid that the ould gandher was let into the room agin, an' they
all begin'd to talk iv sindin' him the nixt mornin' to be sould for
roastin' in Tipperary, jist as if it was a thing andoubtingly settled.
But divil a notice the gandher tuck, no more nor if they wor spaking iv
the Lord-Liftinant; an' Terence desired the boys to get ready the kish
for the poulthry, an' to 'settle it out wid hay soft an' shnug,' says
he, 'for it's the last jauntin' the poor ould gandher 'ill get in this
world,' says he.
"Well, as the night was gettin' late, Terence was growin' mighty
sorrowful an' down-hearted in himself entirely wid the notions iv what
was goin' to happen. An' as soon as the wife an' the crathurs wor fairly
in bed, he brought out some illigint potteen, an' himself an' Jer Garvan
sot down to it; an', begorra, the more anasy Terence got, the more he
dhrank, and himself and Jer Garvan finished a quart betune them. It
wasn't an imparial, though, an' more's the pity, for them wasn't
anvinted antil short since; but divil a much matther it signifies any
longer if a pint could hould two quarts, let alone what it does, sinst
Father Mathew--the Lord purloin his raverince--begin'd to give the
pledge, an' wid the blessin' iv timperance to deginerate Ireland.
"An', begorra, I have the medle myself; an' it's proud I am iv that
same, for abstamiousness is a fine thing, although it's mighty dhry.
"Well, whin Terence finished his pint, he thought he might as well stop;
'for enough is as good as a faste,' says he; 'an' I pity the vagabond,'
says he, 'that is not able to conthroul his licquor,' says he, 'an' to
keep constantly inside iv a pint measure,' says he; an' wid that he
wished Jer Garvan a good night an' walked out iv the room.
"But he wint out the wrong door, bein' a thrifle hearty in himself an'
not rightly knowin' whether he was standin' on his head or his heels,
or both iv them at the same time, an' in place iv gettin' into bed,
where did he thrun himself but into the poulthry hamper that the boys
had settled out ready for the gandher in the mornin'. An', sure enough,
he sunk down soft an' complate through the hay to the bottom; an' wid
the turnin' and roulin' about in the night, the divil a bit iv him but
was covered up as shnug as a lumper in a pittaty furrow before mornin'.
"So wid the first light, up gets the two boys that wor to take the
sperit, as they consaved, to Tipperary; an' they cotched the ould
gandher an' put him in the hamper, an' clapped a good wisp iv hay an the
top iv him, an' tied it down sthrong wid a bit iv a coard, an' med the
sign iv the crass over him, in dhread iv any harum, an' put the hamper
up an the car, wontherin' all the while what in the world was makin' the
ould bird so surprisin' heavy.
"Well, they wint along quite anasy towards Tipperary, wishin' every
minute that some iv the neighbours bound the same way id happen to fall
in with them, for they didn't half like the notions iv havin' no company
but the bewitched gandher, an' small blame to them for that same.
"But although they wor shaking in their skhins in dhread iv the ould
bird beginnin' to convarse them every minute, they did not let an to one
another, but kep singin' an' whistlin' like mad to keep the dread out iv
their hearts.
"Well, afther they wor on the road betther nor half an hour, they kem to
the bad bit close by Father Crotty's, an' there was one divil of a rut
three feet deep at the laste; an' the car got sich a wondherful chuck
goin' through it that it wakened Terence widin in the basket.
"'Bad luck to ye,' says he, 'my bones is bruck wid yer thricks; what the
divil are ye doin' wid me?'
"'Did ye hear anything quare, Thady?' says the boy that was next to the
car, turnin' as white as the top iv a mushroom; 'did ye hear anything
quare soundin' out iv the hamper?' says he.
"'No, nor you,' says Thady, turnin' as pale as himself. 'It's the ould
gandher that's gruntin' wid the shakin' he's gettin',' says he.
"'Where the divil have ye put me into?' says Terence inside. 'Bad luck
to your sowls,' says he; 'let me out, or I'll be smothered this minute,'
says he.
"'There's no use in purtending,' says the boy; 'the gandher's spakin',
glory be to God,' says he.
"'Let me out, you murdherers,' says Terence.
"'In the name iv the blessed Vargin,' says Thady, 'an' iv all the holy
saints, hould yer tongue, you unnatheral gandher,' says he.
"'Who's that, that dar to call me nicknames?' says Terence inside,
roaring wid the fair passion. 'Let me out, you blasphamious infiddles,'
says he, 'or by this crass I'll stretch ye,' says he.
"'In the name iv all the blessed saints in heaven,' says Thady, 'who the
divil are ye?'
"'Who the divil would I be, but Terence Mooney,' says he. 'It's myself
that's in it, you unmerciful bliggards,' says he. 'Let me out, or, by
the holy, I'll get out in spite iv yes,' says he, 'an', by jaburs, I'll
wallop yes in arnest,' says he.
"'It's ould Terence, sure enough,' says Thady. 'Isn't it cute the fairy
docthor found him out?' says he.
"'I'm an the pint of snuffication,' says Terence. 'Let me out, I tell
you, an' wait till I get at ye,' says he, 'for, begorra, the divil a
bone in your body but I'll powdher,' says he.
"An' wid that he beginned kickin' and flingin' inside in the hamper, and
dhrivin' his legs agin the sides iv it, that it was a wonder he did not
knock it to pieces.
"Well, as soon as the boys seen that they skelped the ould horse into a
gallop as hard as he could peg towards the priest's house, through the
ruts, an' over the stones; an' you'd see the hamper fairly flyin' three
feet up in the air with the joultin'; glory be to God.
"So it was small wondher, by the time they got to his raverince's door,
the breath was fairly knocked out of poor Terence, so that he was lyin'
speechless in the bottom iv the hamper.
"Well, whin his raverince kem down, they up an' they tould him all that
happened, an' how they put the gandher in the hamper, an' how he
beginned to spake, an' how he confissed that he was ould Terence Mooney;
an' they axed his honour to advise them how to get rid iv the sperit for
good an' all.
"So says his raverince, says he:
"'I'll take my booke,' says he, 'an' I'll read some rale sthrong holy
bits out iv it,' says he, 'an' do you get a rope and put it round the
hamper,' says he, 'an' let it swing over the runnin' wather at the
bridge,' says he, 'an' it's no matther if I don't make the sperit come
out iv it,' says he.
"Well, wid that the priest got his horse, and tuck his booke in undher
his arm, an' the boys follied his raverince, ladin' the horse down to
the bridge, an' divil a word out iv Terence all the way, for he seen it
was no use spakin', an' he was afeard if he med any noise they might
thrait him to another gallop an' finish him intirely.
"Well, as soon as they wor all come to the bridge, the boys tuck the
rope they had wid them an' med it fast to the top iv the hamper, an'
swung it fairly over the bridge, lettin' it hang in the air about twelve
feet out iv the wather.
"And his raverince rode down to the bank of the river close by, an'
beginned to read mighty loud and bould intirely.
"An' whin he was goin' on about five minutes, all at onst the bottom iv
the hamper kem out, an' down wint Terence, falling splash into the
wather, an' the ould gandher a-top iv him. Down they both wint to the
bottom, wid a souse you'd hear half a mile off.
"An' before they had time to rise agin, his raverince, wid the fair
astonishment, giv his horse one dig iv the spurs, an' before he knew
where he was, in he wint, horse an' all, a-top iv them, an' down to the
bottom.
"Up they all kem agin together, gaspin' and puffin', an' off down wid
the current wid them, like shot in under the arch iv the bridge till
they kem to the shallow wather.
"The ould gandher was the first out, and the priest and Terence kem
next, pantin' an' blowin' an' more than half dhrounded, an' his
raverince was so freckened wid the dhroundin' he got and wid the sight
iv the sperit, as he consaved, that he wasn't the better of it for a
month.
"An' as soon as Terence could spake he swore he'd have the life of the
two gossoons; but Father Crotty would not give him his will. An' as soon
as he was got quiter they all endivoured to explain it; but Terence
consaved he went raly to bed the night before, an' his wife said the
same to shilter him from the suspision for havin' th' dhrop taken. An'
his raverince said it was a mysthery, an' swore if he cotched anyone
laughin' at the accident he'd lay the horsewhip across their shoulders.
"An' Terence grew fonder an' fonder iv the gandher every day, until at
last he died in a wondherful old age, lavin' the gandher afther him an'
a large family iv childher.
"An' to this day the farm is rinted by one iv Terence Mooney's lenial
and legitimate postariors."



