

There was a poor man there. He had a great family of sons. He had no
means to put them forward. He had them at school. One day, when they
were coming from school, he thought that whichever of them was last at
the door he would keep him out. It was the youngest of the family that
was last at the door. The father shut the door. He would not let him in.
The boy went weeping. He would not let him in till night came. The
father said he would never let him in--that he had boys enough.
The lad went away. He was walking till night. He came to a house on the
rugged side of a hill on a height, one feather giving it shelter and
support. He went in. He got a place till morning. When he made his
breakfast in the morning he was going. The man of the house made him a
present of a red pony, a saddle, and bridle. He went riding on the pony.
He went away with himself.
"Now," said the pony, "whatever thing you may see before you, don't
touch it."
They went on with themselves. He saw a light before him on the high
road. When he came as far as the light, there was an open box on the
road, and a light coming out of it. He took up the box. There was a lock
of hair in it.
"Are you going to take up the box?" said the pony.
"I am. I cannot go past it."
"It's better for you to leave it," said the pony.
He took up the box. He put it in his pocket. He was going with himself.
A gentleman met him.
"Pretty is your little beast. Where are you going?"
"I am looking for service."
"I am in want of one like you among the stable-boys."
He hired the lad. The lad said he must get room for the little beast in
the stable. The gentleman said he would get it. They went home then. He
had eleven boys. When they were going out into the stable at ten o'clock
each of them took a light with him but he. He took no candle at all with
him.
Each of them went into his own stable. When he went into his stable, he
opened the box. He left it in a hole in the wall. The light was great.
It was twice as much as in the other stables. There was wonder on the
boys--what was the reason of the light being so great, and he without a
candle with him at all. They told the master they did not know what was
the cause of the light with the last boy. They had given him no candle,
and he had twice as much light as they had.
"Watch to-morrow night what kind of light he has," said the master.
They watched the night of the morrow. They saw the box in the hole that
was in the wall, and the light coming out of the box. They told the
master. When the boys came to the house, the King asked him what was the
reason why he did not take a candle with him to the stable, as well as
the other boys. The lad said he had a candle. The King said he had not.
He asked him how he got the box from which the light came. He said he
had no box. The King said he had, and that he must give it to him; that
he would not keep him, unless he gave him the box. The boy gave it to
him. The King opened it. He drew out the lock of hair, in which was the
light.
"You must go," said the King, "and bring me the woman to whom the hair
belongs."
The lad was troubled. He went out. He told the red pony.
"I told you not to take up the box. You will get more than that on
account of the box. When you have made your breakfast to-morrow, put the
saddle and bridle on me."
When he made his breakfast on the morning of the morrow, he put saddle
and bridle on the pony. He went till they came to three miles of sea.
"Keep a good hold now. I am going to give a jump over the sea. When I
arrive yonder, there is a fair on the strand. Everyone will be coming up
to you to ask for a ride, because I am such a pretty little beast. Give
no one a ride. You will see a beautiful woman drawing near you, her in
whose hair was the wonderful light. She will come up to you. She will
ask you to let her ride for a while. Say you will, and welcome. When she
comes riding, I will be off."
When she came to the sea, she cleared the three miles at a jump. She
came upon the land opposite, and everyone was asking for a ride upon the
beast, she was that pretty. He was giving a ride to no one. He saw that
woman in the midst of the people. She was drawing near. She asked him
would he give her a little riding. He said he would give it, and a
thousand welcomes. She went riding. She went quietly, till she got out
of the crowd. When the pony came to the sea, she made the three-mile
jump again, the beautiful woman along with her. She took her home to the
King. There was great joy on the King to see her. He took her into the
parlour. She said to him she would not marry anyone until he would get
the bottle of healing water that was in the eastern world. The King said
to the lad he must go and bring the bottle of healing water that was in
the eastern world to the lady. The lad was troubled. He went to the
pony. He told the pony he must go to the eastern world for the bottle of
healing water that was in it, and bring it to the lady.
"My advice was good," said the pony, "on the day you took the box up.
Put saddle and bridle on me."
He went riding on her. They were going till they came to the sea. She
stood then.
"You must kill me," said the pony. "That, or I must kill you!"
"It is hard to me to kill you," said the boy. "If I kill you, there will
be no way to myself."
He cut her down. He opened her up. She was not long opened when there
came two black ravens and one small one. The two ravens went into the
body. They drank their fill of the blood. When they came out, the little
raven went in. He closed up the pony. He would not let the little bird
come out till he got the bottle of healing water that was in the eastern
world. The ravens were very troubled. They were begging him to let the
little bird out. He said he would not let it out till they brought him
the bottle. They went to seek the bottle. They came back, and there was
no bottle with them. They were entreating him to let the bird out to
them. He would not let out the bird till he got the bottle. They went
away again for the bottle. They came again at evening. They were tossed
and scorched, and they had the bottle. They came to the place where the
pony was. They gave the bottle to the boy. He rubbed the healing water
to every place where they were burned. Then he let out the little bird.
There was great joy on them to see him. He rubbed some of the healing
water to the place where he cut the pony. He spilt a drop into her ear.
She arose as well as she ever was. He had a little bottle in his pocket.
He put some of the healing water into it. They went home.
When the King perceived the pony coming, he rose out. He took hold of
her with his two hands. He took her in. He smothered her with kisses,
and drowned her with tears; he dried her with finest cloths of silk and
satin.
This is what the lady was doing while they were away. She boiled pitch,
and filled a barrel, and that boiling. Now she went beside it. She
rubbed the healing water to herself. She came out; she went to the
barrel. She gave a jump in and out of the barrel. Three times she went
in and out. She said she would never marry anyone who could not do the
same. The young King came. He went to the barrel. He fell half in, half
out.
He was all boiled and burned. Another gentleman came. He gave a jump
into the barrel. He was burned. He came not out till he died. After that
there was no one going in or out. The barrel was there, and no one at
all was going near it. The lad went up to it. He rubbed the healing
water on himself. He came to the barrel. He jumped in and out three
times. He was watching her. She came out. She said she would never marry
anyone but him.
Came the priest of the pattens, and the clerk of the bells. The pair
were married. The wedding lasted three days and three nights. When it
was over, the lad went to look at the place where the pony was. He never
remembered to go and see the pony during the wedding. He found nothing
but a heap of bones. There were two champions and two girls playing
cards. The lad went crying when he saw the bones of the pony. One of the
girls asked what was the matter with him. He said it was all one to
her--that she cared nothing for his troubles.
"I would like to get knowledge of the cause why you are crying."
"It was my pony who was here. I never remembered to see her during the
wedding. I have nothing now but her bones. I don't know what I shall do
after her. It was she who did all that I accomplished."
The girl went laughing.
"Would you know your pony if you saw her?"
"I would know," said he.
She laid aside the cards. She stood up.
"Isn't that your pony?" said she.
"It is," said he.
"I was the pony," said the girl, "and the two ravens who went in to
drink my blood my two brothers. When the ravens came out, a little bird
went in. You closed the pony. You would not let the little bird out till
they brought the bottle of healing water that was in the eastern world.
They brought the bottle to you. The little bird was my sister. It was my
brothers were the ravens. We were all under enchantments. It is my
sister who is married to you. The enchantments are gone from us since
she was married."


