
There was once a man who had three sons, and no other possessions
beyond the house in which he lived. Now the father loved his three sons
equally, so that he could not make up his mind which of them should have
the house after his death, because he did not wish to favour any one
more than the others. And he did not want to sell the house, because
it had belonged to his family for generations; otherwise he could have
divided the money equally amongst them. At last an idea struck him, and
he said to his sons: 'You must all go out into the world, and look about
you, and each learn a trade, and then, when you return, whoever can
produce the best masterpiece shall have the house.'
The sons were quite satisfied. The eldest wished to be a blacksmith, the
second a barber, and the third a fencing-master. They appointed a time
when they were to return home, and then they all set out.
It so happened that each found a good master, where he learnt all that
was necessary for his trade in the best possible way. The blacksmith had
to shoe the king's horses, and thought to himself, 'Without doubt the
house will be yours!' The barber shaved the best men in the kingdom,
and he, too, made sure that the house would be his. The fencing-master
received many a blow, but he set his teeth, and would not allow himself
to be troubled by them, for he thought to himself, 'If you are afraid of
a blow you will never get the house.'
When the appointed time had come the three brothers met once more, and
they sat down and discussed the best opportunity of showing off their
skill. Just then a hare came running across the field towards them.
'Look!' said the barber, 'here comes something in the nick of time!'
seized basin and soap, made a lather whilst the hare was approaching,
and then, as it ran at full tilt, shaved its moustaches, without cutting
it or injuring a single hair on its body.
'I like that very much indeed,' said the father. 'Unless the others
exert themselves to the utmost, the house will be yours.'
Soon after they saw a man driving a carriage furiously towards them.
'Now, father, you shall see what I can do!' said the blacksmith, and he
sprang after the carriage, tore off the four shoes of the horse as
it was going at the top of its speed, and shod it with four new ones
without checking its pace.
'You are a clever fellow!' said the father, 'and know your trade as well
as your brother. I really don't know to which of you I shall give the
house.'
Then the third son said, 'Father, let me also show you something;' and,
as it was beginning to rain, he drew his sword and swung it in cross
cuts above his head, so that not a drop fell on him, and the rain fell
heavier and heavier, till at last it was coming down like a waterspout,
but he swung his sword faster and faster, and kept as dry as if he were
under cover.
When the father saw this he was astonished, and said, 'You have produced
the greatest masterpiece: the house is yours.'
Both the other brothers were quite satisfied, and praised him too, and
as they were so fond of each other they all three remained at home and
plied their trades: and as they were so experienced and skilful they
earned a great deal of money. So they lived happily together till they
were quite old, and when one was taken ill and died the two others were
so deeply grieved that they were also taken ill and died too. And so,
because they had all been so clever, and so fond of each other, they
were all laid in one grave.



There was once upon a time a witch, who in the shape of a hawk used
every night to break the windows of a certain village church. In the
same village there lived three brothers, who were all determined to kill
the mischievous hawk. But in vain did the two eldest mount guard in the
church with their guns; as soon as the bird appeared high above their
heads, sleep overpowered them, and they only awoke to hear the windows
crashing in.
Then the youngest brother took his turn of guarding the windows, and to
prevent his being overcome by sleep he placed a lot of thorns under his
chin, so that if he felt drowsy and nodded his head, they would prick
him and keep him awake.
The moon was already risen, and it was as light as day, when suddenly he
heard a fearful noise, and at the same time a terrible desire to sleep
overpowered him.
His eyelids closed, and his head sank on his shoulders, but the thorns
ran into him and were so painful that he awoke at once. He saw the hawk
swooping down upon the church, and in a moment he had seized his gun
and shot at the bird. The hawk fell heavily under a big stone, severely
wounded in its right wing. The youth ran to look at it, and saw that
a huge abyss had opened below the stone. He went at once to fetch his
brothers, and with their help dragged a lot of pine-wood and ropes to
the spot. They fastened some of the burning pine-wood to the end of the
rope, and let it slowly down to the bottom of the abyss. At first it was
quite dark, and the flaming torch only lit up dirty grey stone walls.
But the youngest brother determined to explore the abyss, and letting
himself down by the rope he soon reached the bottom. Here he found a
lovely meadow full of green trees and exquisite flowers.
In the middle of the meadow stood a huge stone castle, with an iron gate
leading to it, which was wide open. Everything in the castle seemed
to be made of copper, and the only inhabitant he could discover was
a lovely girl, who was combing her golden hair; and he noticed that
whenever one of her hairs fell on the ground it rang out like pure
metal. The youth looked at her more closely, and saw that her skin was
smooth and fair, her blue eyes bright and sparkling, and her hair as
golden as the sun. He fell in love with her on the spot, and kneeling at
her feet, he implored her to become his wife.
The lovely girl accepted his proposal gladly; but at the same time she
warned him that she could never come up to the world above till her
mother, the old witch, was dead. And she went on to tell him that the
only way in which the old creature could be killed was with the sword
that hung up in the castle; but the sword was so heavy that no one could
lift it.
Then the youth went into a room in the castle where everything was made
of silver, and here he found another beautiful girl, the sister of his
bride. She was combing her silver hair, and every hair that fell on the
ground rang out like pure metal. The second girl handed him the sword,
but though he tried with all his strength he could not lift it. At last
a third sister came to him and gave him a drop of something to drink,
which she said would give him the needful strength. He drank one drop,
but still he could not lift the sword; then he drank a second, and the
sword began to move; but only after he had drunk a third drop was he
able to swing the sword over his head.
Then he hid himself in the castle and awaited the old witch's arrival.
At last as it was beginning to grow dark she appeared. She swooped down
upon a big apple-tree, and after shaking some golden apples from it, she
pounced down upon the earth. As soon as her feet touched the ground she
became transformed from a hawk into a woman. This was the moment the
youth was waiting for, and he swung his mighty sword in the air with all
his strength and the witch's head fell off, and her blood spurted up on
the walls.
Without fear of any further danger, he packed up all the treasures of
the castle into great chests, and gave his brothers a signal to pull
them up out of the abyss. First the treasures were attached to the rope
and then the three lovely girls. And now everything was up above and
only he himself remained below. But as he was a little suspicious of his
brothers, he fastened a heavy stone on to the rope and let them pull it
up. At first they heaved with a will, but when the stone was half way
up they let it drop suddenly, and it fell to the bottom broken into a
hundred pieces.
'So that's what would have happened to my bones had I trusted myself to
them,' said the youth sadly; and he began to cry bitterly, not because
of the treasures, but because of the lovely girl with her swanlike neck
and golden hair.
For a long time he wandered sadly all through the beautiful underworld,
and one day he met a magician who asked him the cause of his tears. The
youth told him all that had befallen him, and the magician said:
'Do not grieve, young man! If you will guard the children who are hidden
in the golden apple-tree, I will bring you at once up to the earth.
Another magician who lives in this land always eats my children up. It
is in vain that I have hidden them under the earth and locked them into
the castle. Now I have hidden them in the apple-tree; hide yourself
there too, and at midnight you will see my enemy.'
The youth climbed up the tree, and picked some of the beautiful golden
apples, which he ate for his supper.
At midnight the wind began to rise, and a rustling sound was heard at
the foot of the tree. The youth looked down and beheld a long thick
serpent beginning to crawl up the tree. It wound itself round the stem
and gradually got higher and higher. It stretched its huge head, in
which the eyes glittered fiercely, among the branches, searching for the
nest in which the little children lay. They trembled with terror when
they saw the hideous creature, and hid themselves beneath the leaves.
Then the youth swung his mighty sword in the air, and with one blow cut
off the serpent's head. He cut up the rest of the body into little bits
and strewed them to the four winds.
The father of the rescued children was so delighted over the death of
his enemy that he told the youth to get on his back, and in this way he
carried him up to the world above.
With what joy did he hurry now to his brothers' house! He burst into a
room where they were all assembled, but no one knew who he was. Only his
bride, who was serving as cook to her sisters, recognised her lover at
once.
His brothers, who had quite believed he was dead, yielded him up his
treasures at once, and flew into the woods in terror. But the good youth
forgave them all they had done, and divided his treasures with them.
Then he built himself a big castle with golden windows, and there he
lived happily with his golden-haired wife till the end of their lives.



