
THERE was once upon a time a fisherman, who lived hard by a palace and
fished for the King's table. One day he was out fishing, but caught
nothing at all. Let him do what he might with rod and line, there was
never even so much as a sprat on his hook; but when the day was well
nigh over, a head rose up out of the water, and said: 'If you will
give me what your wife shows you when you go home, you shall catch fish
enough.'
So the man said 'Yes' in a moment, and then he caught fish in plenty;
but when he got home at night, and his wife showed him a baby which had
just been born, and fell a-weeping and wailing when he told her of the
promise which he had given, he was very unhappy.
All this was soon told to the King up at the palace, and when he heard
what sorrow the woman was in, and the reason of it, he said that he
himself would take the child and see if he could not save it. The baby
was a boy, and the King took him at once and brought him up as his own
son until the lad grew up. Then one day he begged to have leave to go
out with his father to fish; he had a strong desire to do this, he said.
The King was very unwilling to permit it, but at last the lad got leave.
He stayed with his father, and all went prosperously and well with them
the whole day, until they came back to land in the evening. Then the lad
found that he had lost his pocket-handkerchief, and would go out in the
boat after it; but no sooner had he got into the boat than it began to
move off with him so quickly that the water foamed all round about, and
all that the lad did to keep the boat back with the oars was done to no
purpose, for it went on and on the whole night through, and at last he
came to a white strand that lay far, far away. There he landed, and when
he had walked on for some distance he met an old man with a long white
beard.
'What is the name of this country?' said the youth.
'Whiteland,' answered the man, and then he begged the youth to tell him
whence he came and what he was going to do, and the youth did so.
'Well, then,' said the man, 'if you walk on farther along the seashore
here, you will come to three princesses who are standing in the earth so
that their heads alone are out of it. Then the first of them will call
you--she is the eldest--and will beg you very prettily to come to her
and help her, and the second will do the same, but you must not go near
either of them. Hurry past, as if you neither saw nor heard them; but
you shall go to the third and do what she bids you; it will bring you
good fortune.'
When the youth came to the first princess, she called to him and begged
him to come to her very prettily, but he walked on as if he did not even
see her, and he passed by the second in the same way, but he went up to
the third.
'If thou wilt do what I tell thee, thou shalt choose among us three,'
said the Princess.
So the lad said that he was most willing, and she told him that three
Trolls had planted them all three there in the earth, but that formerly
they had dwelt in the castle which he could see at some distance in the
wood.
'Now,' she said, 'thou shalt go into the castle, and let the Trolls beat
thee one night for each of us, and if thou canst but endure that, thou
wilt set us free.'
'Yes,' answered the lad, 'I will certainly try to do so.'
'When thou goest in,' continued the Princess, 'two lions will stand by
the doorway, but if thou only goest straight between them they will do
thee no harm; go straight forward into a small dark chamber; there thou
shalt lie down. Then the Troll will come and beat thee, but thou
shalt take the flask which is hanging on the wall, and anoint thyself
wheresoever he has wounded thee, after which thou shalt be as well as
before. Then lay hold of the sword which is hanging by the side of the
flask, and smite the Troll dead.'
So he did what the Princess had told him. He walked straight in between
the lions just as if he did not see them, and then into the small
chamber, and lay down on the bed.
The first night a Troll came with three heads and three rods, and beat
the lad most unmercifully; but he held out until the Troll was done with
him, and then he took the flask and rubbed himself. Having done this, he
grasped the sword and smote the Troll dead.
In the morning when he went to the sea-shore the Princesses were out of
the earth as far as their waists.
The next night everything happened in the same way, but the Troll who
came then had six heads and six rods, and he beat him much more severely
than the first had done but when the lad went out of doors next morning,
the Princesses were out of the earth as far as their knees.
On the third night a Troll came who had nine heads and nine rods, and he
struck the lad and flogged him so long, that at last he swooned away; so
the Troll took him up and flung him against the wall, and this made the
flask of ointment fall down, and it splashed all over him, and he became
as strong as ever again.
Then, without loss of time, he grasped the sword and struck the Troll
dead, and in the morning when he went out of the castle the Princesses
were standing there entirely out of the earth. So he took the youngest
for his Queen, and lived with her very happily for a long time.
At last, however, he took a fancy to go home for a short time to see his
parents. His Queen did not like this, but when his longing grew so great
that he told her he must and would go, she said to him:
'One thing shalt thou promise me, and that is, to do what thy father
bids thee, but not what thy mother bids thee,' and this he promised.
So she gave him a ring, which enabled him who wore it to obtain two
wishes.
He wished himself at home, and instantly found himself there; but his
parents were so amazed at the splendour of his apparel that their wonder
never ceased.
When he had been at home for some days his mother wanted him to go up to
the palace, to show the King what a great man he had become.
The father said, 'No; he must not do that, for if he does we shall have
no more delight in him this time; 'but he spoke in vain, for the mother
begged and prayed until at last he went.
When he arrived there he was more splendid, both in raiment and in all
else, than the other King, who did not like it, and said:
'Well, you can see what kind of Queen mine is, but I can't see yours. I
do not believe you have such a pretty Queen as I have.'
'Would to heaven she were standing here, and then you would be able to
see!' said the young King, and in an instant she was standing there.
But she was very sorrowful, and said to him, 'Why didst thou not
remember my words, and listen only to what thy father said? Now must I
go home again at once, and thou hast wasted both thy wishes.'
Then she tied a ring in his hair, which had her name upon it, and wished
herself at home again.
And now the young King was deeply afflicted, and day out and day in went
about thinking of naught else but how to get back again to his Queen.
'I will try to see if there is any place where I can learn how to find
Whiteland,' he thought, and journeyed forth out into the world.
When he had gone some distance he came to a mountain, where he met a man
who was Lord over all the beasts in the forest--for they all came to him
when he blew a horn which he had. So the King asked where Whiteland was.
'I do not know that,' he answered, 'but I will ask my beasts.' Then he
blew his horn and inquired whether any of them knew where Whiteland lay,
but there was not one who knew that.
So the man gave him a pair of snow shoes. 'When you have these on,' he
said, 'you will come to my brother, who lives hundreds of miles from
here; he is Lord over all the birds in the air--ask him. When you have
got there, just turn the shoes so that the toes point this way, and then
they will come home again of their own accord.'
When the King arrived there he turned the shoes as the Lord of the
beasts had bidden him, and they went back.
And now he once more asked after Whiteland, and the man summoned all the
birds together, and inquired if any of them knew where Whiteland lay.
No, none knew this. Long after the others there came an old eagle. He
had been absent ten whole years, but he too knew no more than the rest.
'Well, well,' said the man, 'then you shall have the loan of a pair of
snow shoes of mine. If you wear them you will get to my brother, who
lives hundreds of miles from here. He is Lord of all the fish in the
sea--you can ask him. But do not forget to turn the shoes round.'
The King thanked him, put on the shoes, and when he had got to him who
was Lord of all the fish in the sea, he turned the snow shoes round, and
back they went just as the others had gone, and he asked once more where
Whiteland was.
The man called the fish together with his horn, but none of them knew
anything about it. At last came an old, old pike, which he had great
difficulty in bringing home to him.
When he asked the pike, it said, 'Yes, Whiteland is well known to me,
for I have been cook there these ten years. To-morrow morning I have
to go back there, for now the Queen, whose King is staying away, is to
marry some one else.'
'If that be the case I will give you a piece of advice,' said the man.
'Not far from here on a moor stand three brothers, who have stood there
a hundred years fighting for a hat, a cloak, and a pair of boots; if
any one has these three things he can make himself invisible, and if he
desires to go to any place, he has but to wish and he is there. You may
tell them that you have a desire to try these things, and then you will
be able to decide which of the men is to have them.'
So the King thanked him and went, and did what he had said.
'What is this that you are standing fighting about for ever and ever?'
said he to the brothers; 'let me make a trial of these things, and then
I will judge between you.'
They willingly consented to this, but when he had got the hat, the
cloak, and the boots, he said, 'Next time we meet you shall have my
decision,' and hereupon he wished himself away.
While he was going quickly through the air he fell in with the North
Wind.
'And where may you be going?' said the North Wind.
'To Whiteland,' said the King, and then he related what had happened to
him.
'Well,' said the North Wind, 'you can easily go a little quicker than
I can, for I have to puff and blow into every corner; but when you get
there, place yourself on the stairs by the side of the door, and then
I will come blustering in as if I wanted to blow down the whole castle,
and when the Prince who is to have your Queen comes out to see what is
astir, just take him by the throat and fling him out, and then I will
try to carry him away from court.'
As the North Wind had said, so did the King. He stood on the stairs, and
when the North Wind came howling and roaring, and caught the roof and
walls of the castle till they shook again, the Prince went out to see
what was the matter; but as soon as he came the King took him by the
neck and flung him out, and then the North Wind laid hold of him and
carried him off. And when he was rid of him the King went into the
castle. At first the Queen did not know him, because he had grown so
thin and pale from having travelled so long and so sorrowfully; but when
she saw her ring she was heartily glad, and then the rightful wedding
was held, and held in such a way that it was talked about far and
wide.(12)

THE VOICE OF DEATH
ONCE upon a time there lived a man whose one wish and prayer was to get
rich. Day and night he thought of nothing else, and at last his prayers
were granted, and he became very wealthy. Now being so rich, and having
so much to lose, he felt that it would be a terrible thing to die and
leave all his possessions behind; so he made up his mind to set out in
search of a land where there was no death. He got ready for his journey,
took leave of his wife, and started. Whenever he came to a new country
the first question that he asked was whether people died in that land,
and when he heard that they did, he set out again on his quest. At last
he reached a country where he was told that the people did not even know
the meaning of the word death. Our traveller was delighted when he heard
this, and said:
'But surely there are great numbers of people in your land, if no one
ever dies?'
'No,' they replied, 'there are not great numbers, for you see from time
to time a voice is heard calling first one and then another, and whoever
hears that voice gets up and goes away, and never comes back.'
'And do they see the person who calls them,' he asked, 'or do they only
hear his voice?'
'They both see and hear him,' was the answer.
Well, the man was amazed when he heard that the people were stupid
enough to follow the voice, though they knew that if they went when it
called them they would never return. And he went back to his own home
and got all his possessions together, and, taking his wife and family,
he set out resolved to go and live in that country where the people did
not die, but where instead they heard a voice calling them, which they
followed into a land from which they never returned. For he had made
up his own mind that when he or any of his family heard that voice they
would pay no heed to it, however loudly it called.
After he had settled down in his new home, and had got everything in
order about him, he warned his wife and family that, unless they wanted
to die, they must on no account listen to a voice which they might some
day hear calling them.
For some years everything went well with them, and they lived happily in
their new home. But one day, while they were all sitting together round
the table, his wife suddenly started up, exclaiming in a loud voice:
'I am coming! I am coming!'
And she began to look round the room for her fur coat, but her husband
jumped up, and taking firm hold of her by the hand, held her fast, and
reproached her, saying:
'Don't you remember what I told you? Stay where you are unless you wish
to die.'
'But don't you hear that voice calling me?' she answered. 'I am merely
going to see why I am wanted. I shall come back directly.'
So she fought and struggled to get away from her husband, and to go
where the voice summoned. But he would not let her go, and had all the
doors of the house shut and bolted. When she saw that he had done this,
she said:
'Very well, dear husband, I shall do what you wish, and remain where I
am.'
So her husband believed that it was all right, and that she had thought
better of it, and had got over her mad impulse to obey the voice. But a
few minutes later she made a sudden dash for one of the doors, opened it
and darted out, followed by her husband. He caught her by the fur
coat, and begged and implored her not to go, for if she did she
would certainly never return. She said nothing, but let her arms fall
backwards, and suddenly bending herself forward, she slipped out of the
coat, leaving it in her husband's hands. He, poor man, seemed turned to
stone as he gazed after her hurrying away from him, and calling at the
top of her voice, as she ran:
'I am coming! I am coming!'
When she was quite out of sight her husband recovered his wits and went
back into his house, murmuring:
'If she is so foolish as to wish to die, I can't help it. I warned
and implored her to pay no heed to that voice, however loudly it might
call.'
Well, days and weeks and months and years passed, and nothing happened
to disturb the peace of the household. But one day the man was at the
barber's as usual, being shaved. The shop was full of people, and
his chin had just been covered with a lather of soap, when, suddenly
starting up from the chair, he called out in a loud voice:
'I won't come, do you hear? I won't come!'
The barber and the other people in the shop listened to him with
amazement. But again looking towards the door, he exclaimed:
'I tell you, once and for all, I do not mean to come, so go away.'
And a few minutes later he called out again:
'Go away, I tell you, or it will be the worse for you. You may call as
much as you like but you will never get me to come.'
And he got so angry that you might have thought that some one was
actually standing at the door, tormenting him. At last he jumped up, and
caught the razor out of the barber's hand, exclaiming:
'Give me that razor, and I'll teach him to let people alone for the
future.'
And he rushed out of the house as if he were running after some one,
whom no one else saw. The barber, determined not to lose his razor,
pursued the man, and they both continued running at full speed till they
had got well out of the town, when all of a sudden the man fell head
foremost down a precipice, and never was seen again. So he too, like the
others, had been forced against his will to follow the voice that called
him.
The barber, who went home whistling and congratulating himself on the
escape he had made, described what had happened, and it was noised
abroad in the country that the people who had gone away, and had never
returned, had all fallen into that pit; for till then they had never
known what had happened to those who had heard the voice and obeyed its
call.
But when crowds of people went out from the town to examine the
ill-fated pit that had swallowed up such numbers, and yet never seemed
to be full, they could discover nothing. All that they could see was a
vast plain, that looked as if it had been there since the beginning of
the world. And from that time the people of the country began to die
like ordinary mortals all the world over.(13)



