
Three brothers and one sister lived together in a small cottage, and
they loved one another dearly. One day the eldest brother, who had never
done anything but amuse himself from sunrise to sunset, said to the
rest, 'Let us all work hard, and perhaps we shall grow rich, and be able
to build ourselves a palace.'
And his brothers and sister answered joyfully, 'Yes, we will all work!'
So they fell to working with all their might, till at last they became
rich, and were able to build themselves a beautiful palace; and everyone
came from miles round to see its wonders, and to say how splendid it
was. No one thought of finding any faults, till at length an old woman,
who had been walking through the rooms with a crowd of people, suddenly
exclaimed, 'Yes, it is a splendid palace, but there is still something
it needs!'
'And what may that be?'
'A church.'
When they heard this the brothers set to work again to earn some more
money, and when they had got enough they set about building a church,
which should be as large and beautiful as the palace itself.
And after the church was finished greater numbers of people than
ever flocked to see the palace and the church and vast gardens and
magnificent halls.
But one day, as the brothers were as usual doing the honours to their
guests, an old man turned to them and said, 'Yes, it is all most
beautiful, but there is still something it needs!'
'And what may that be?'
'A pitcher of the water of life, a branch of the tree the smell of whose
flowers gives eternal beauty, and the talking bird.'
'And where am I to find all those?'
'Go to the mountain that is far off yonder, and you will find what you
seek.'
After the old man had bowed politely and taken farewell of them the
eldest brother said to the rest, 'I will go in search of the water of
life, and the talking bird, and the tree of beauty.'
'But suppose some evil thing befalls you?' asked his sister. 'How shall
we know?'

'You are right,' he replied; ' I had not thought of that!'
Then they followed the old man, and said to him, 'My eldest brother
wishes to seek for the water of life, and the tree of beauty, and the
talking bird, that you tell him are needful to make our palace perfect.
But how shall we know if any evil thing befall him?'
So the old man took them a knife, and gave it to them, saying, 'Keep
this carefully, and as long as the blade is bright all is well; but if
the blade is bloody, then know that evil has befallen him.'
The brothers thanked him, and departed, and went straight to the palace,
where they found the young man making ready to set out for the mountain
where the treasures he longed for lay hid.
And he walked, and he walked, and he walked, till he had gone a great
way, and there he met a giant.
'Can you tell me how much further I have still to go before I reach that
mountain yonder?'
'And why do you wish to go there?'
'I am seeking the water of life, the talking bird, and a branch of the
tree of beauty.'
'Many have passed by seeking those treasures, but none have ever come
back; and you will never come back either, unless you mark my words.
Follow this path, and when you reach the mountain you will find it
covered with stones. Do not stop to look at them, but keep on your way.
As you go you will hear scoffs and laughs behind you; it will be the
stones that mock. Do not heed them; above all, do not turn round. If you
do you will become as one of them. Walk straight on till you get to the
top, and then take all you wish for.'
The young man thanked him for his counsel, and walked, and walked, and
walked, till he reached the mountain. And as he climbed he heard behind
him scoffs and jeers, but he kept his ears steadily closed to them. At
last the noise grew so loud that he lost patience, and he stooped to
pick up a stone to hurl into the midst of the clamour, when suddenly his
arm seemed to stiffen, and the next moment he was a stone himself!
That day his sister, who thought her brother's steps were long in
returning, took out the knife and found the blade was red as blood. Then
she cried out to her brothers that something terrible had come to pass.
'I will go and find him,' said the second. And he went.
And he walked, and he walked, and he walked, till he met the giant, and
asked him if he had seen a young man travelling towards the mountain.
And the giant answered, 'Yes, I have seen him pass, but I have not seen
him come back. The spell must have worked upon him.'
'Then what can I do to disenchant him, and find the water of life, the
talking bird, and a branch of the tree of beauty?'
'Follow this path, and when you reach the mountain you will find it
covered with stones. Do not stop to look at them, but climb steadily on.
Above all, heed not the laughs and scoffs that will arise on all sides,
and never turn round. And when you reach the top you can then take all
you desire.'
The young man thanked him for his counsel, and set out for the mountain.
But no sooner did he reach it than loud jests and gibes broke out on
every side, and almost deafened him. For some time he let them rail,
and pushed boldly on, till he had passed the place which his brother had
gained; then suddenly he thought that among the scoffing sounds he heard
his brother's voice. He stopped and looked back; and another stone was
added to the number.
Meanwhile the sister left at home was counting the days when her two
brothers should return to her. The time seemed long, and it would be
hard to say how often she took out the knife and looked at its polished
blade to make sure that this one at least was still safe. The blade was
always bright and clear; each time she looked she had the happiness of
knowing that all was well, till one evening, tired and anxious, as she
frequently was at the end of the day, she took it from its drawer, and
behold! the blade was red with blood. Her cry of horror brought her
youngest brother to her, and, unable to speak, she held out the knife!
'I will go,' he said.
So he walked, and he walked, and he walked, until he met the giant, and
he asked, 'Have two young men, making for yonder mountain, passed this
way?'
And the giant answered, 'Yes, they have passed by, but they never came
back, and by this I know that the spell has fallen upon them.'
'Then what must I do to free them, and to get the water of life, and the
talking bird, and the branch of the tree of beauty?'
'Go to the mountain, which you will find so thickly covered with stones
that you will hardly be able to place your feet, and walk straight
forward, turning neither to the right hand nor to the left, and paying
no heed to the laughs and scoffs which will follow you, till you reach
the top, and then you may take all that you desire.'
The young man thanked the giant for his counsel, and set forth to the
mountain. And when he began to climb there burst forth all around him
a storm of scoffs and jeers; but he thought of the giant's words, and
looked neither to the right hand nor to the left, till the mountain top
lay straight before him. A moment now and he would have gained it, when,
through the groans and yells, he heard his brothers' voices. He turned,
and there was one stone the more.

And all this while his sister was pacing up and down the palace, hardly
letting the knife out of her hand, and dreading what she knew she would
see, and what she did see. The blade grew red before her eyes, and she
said, 'Now it is my turn.'
So she walked, and she walked, and she walked till she came to the
giant, and prayed him to tell her if he had seen three young men pass
that way seeking the distant mountain.
'I have seen them pass, but they have never returned, and by this I know
that the spell has fallen upon them.'
'And what must I do to set them free, and to find the water of life, and
the talking bird, and a branch of the tree of beauty?'
'You must go to that mountain, which is so full of stones that your
feet will hardly find a place to tread, and as you climb you will hear
a noise as if all the stones in the world were mocking you; but pay
no heed to anything you may hear, and, once you gain the top, you have
gained everything.'
The girl thanked him for his counsel, and set out for the mountain; and
scarcely had she gone a few steps upwards when cries and screams broke
forth around her, and she felt as if each stone she trod on was a living
thing. But she remembered the words of the giant, and knew not what had
befallen her brothers, and kept her face steadily towards the mountain
top, which grew nearer and nearer every moment. But as she mounted the
clamour increased sevenfold: high above them all rang the voices of her
three brothers. But the girl took no heed, and at last her feet stood
upon the top.
Then she looked round, and saw, lying in a hollow, the pool of the water
of life. And she took the brazen pitcher that she had brought with her,
and filled it to the brim. By the side of the pool stood the tree of
beauty, with the talking bird on one of its boughs; and she caught the
bird, and placed it in a cage, and broke off one of the branches.
After that she turned, and went joyfully down the hill again, carrying
her treasures, but her long climb had tired her out, and the brazen
pitcher was very heavy, and as she walked a few drops of the water spilt
on the stones, and as it touched them they changed into young men and
maidens, crowding about her to give thanks for their deliverance.
So she learnt by this how the evil spell might be broken, and she
carefully sprinkled every stone till there was not one left--only a
great company of youths and girls who followed her down the mountain.
When they arrived at the palace she did not lose a moment in planting
the branch of the tree of beauty and watering it with the water of life.
And the branch shot up into a tree, and was heavy with flowers, and the
talking bird nestled in its branches.
Now the fame of these wonders was noised abroad, and the people flocked
in great numbers to see the three marvels, and the maiden who had won
them; and among the sightseers came the king's son, who would not go
till everything was shown him, and till he had heard how it had all
happened. And the prince admired the strangeness and beauty of the
treasures in the palace, but more than all he admired the beauty and
courage of the maiden who had brought them there. So he went home and
told his parents, and gained their consent to wed her for his wife.
Then the marriage was celebrated in the church adjoining the palace.
Then the bridegroom took her to his own home, where they lived happy for
ever after.




Once upon a time there was a King who was so ill that everybody
despaired of his life, and his three sons were very sorry, and went out
into the palace gardens to weep. There they met an old man, who asked
the cause of their grief, and they told him their Father was so ill that
he must die, for nothing could save him. The old Man said, "I know a
means of saving him: if he drinks of the water of life it will restore
him to health; but it is very difficult to find."
"I will soon find it," said the eldest Son, and, going to the sick King,
he begged his permission to set out in search of the water of life,
which alone could save him. "No; the danger is too great," said the
King; "I prefer to die." Nevertheless, the Son begged and entreated so
long that the King consented, and the Prince went away, thinking in his
own heart, "If I bring this water I am the dearest to my Father, and I
shall inherit his kingdom."
After he had ridden a long way he met a Dwarf on the road, who asked
him, "Whither away so quickly?"
"You stupid dandyprat," replied the Prince proudly, "why should I tell
you that?" and he rode off. But the little Man was angry and he wished
an evil thing, so that, soon after, the Prince came into a narrow
mountain-pass, and the farther he rode the narrower it grew, till at
last it was so close that he could get no farther; but neither could he
turn his horse round, nor dismount, and he sat there like one amazed.
Meanwhile the sick King waited a long while for him, but he did not
come; and the second Son asked leave to go too and seek the water, for
he thought to himself, "If my Brother is dead the kingdom comes to me."
At first the King refused to spare him, but he gave way, and the Prince
set out on the same road as the elder one had taken, and met also the
same Dwarf, who stopped him and asked him, "Whither ride you so
hastily?" "Little dandyprat," replied the Prince, "what do you want to
know for?" and he rode off without looking round. The Dwarf, however,
enchanted him, and it happened to him as it had to his Brother: he came
to a defile where he could move neither forward nor backward. Such is
the fate of all haughty people.
Now, when the second Son did not return, the youngest begged leave to go
and fetch the water, and the King was obliged at last to give his
consent. When he met the Dwarf, and was asked whither he was going so
hurriedly, he stopped and replied, "I seek the water of life, for my
Father is sick unto death." "Do you know where to find it?" asked the
Dwarf. "No," replied the Prince. "Since you have behaved yourself as you
ought," said the Dwarf, "and not haughtily like your false Brothers, I
will give you information and show you where you may obtain the water of
life. It flows from a fountain in the court of an enchanted castle, into
which you can never penetrate if I do not give you an iron rod and two
loaves of bread. With the rod knock thrice at the iron door of the
castle, and it will spring open. Within lie two lions with open jaws,
but if you throw down to each a loaf of bread they will be quiet. Then
hasten and fetch some of the water of life before it strikes twelve, for
then the door will shut again, and you will be imprisoned."
The Prince thanked the Dwarf, and, taking the rod and bread, he set out
on his journey, and as he arrived at the castle he found it as the Dwarf
had said. At the third knock the door sprang open; and, when he had
stilled the lions with the bread, he walked into a fine, large hall,
where sat several enchanted Princes, from whose fingers he drew off the
rings, and he also took away with him a sword and some bread which lay
there. A little farther on he came to a room wherein stood a beautiful
maiden, who was so pleased to see him that she kissed him and said he
had freed her, and should have her whole kingdom, and if he came in
another year their wedding should be celebrated. Then she told him where
the fountain of water of life was placed, and he hastened away lest it
should strike twelve ere he gained it. He came next into a room where a
fine, clean covered bed stood, and, being tired, he lay down to rest
himself a bit. But he went to sleep, and when he awoke it struck the
quarter to twelve, and the sound made him hurry to the fountain, from
which he took some water in a cup which stood near. This done, he
hastened to the door, and was scarcely out before it struck twelve, and
the door swung to so heavily that it carried away a piece of his heel.
But he was very glad, in spite of this, that he had procured the water,
and he journeyed homeward, and passed again where the Dwarf stood. When
the Dwarf saw the sword and bread which he had brought away he declared
he had done well, for with the sword he could destroy whole armies--but
the bread was worth nothing. Now, the Prince was not willing to return
home to his Father without his Brothers, and so he said to the Dwarf,
"Dear Dwarf, can you tell me where my Brothers are? They went out before
me in search of the water of life, and did not return." "They are stuck
fast between two mountains," replied the Dwarf; "because they were so
haughty, I enchanted them there."
Then the Prince begged for their release, till at last the Dwarf brought
them out; but he warned the youngest to beware of them, for they had
evil in their hearts.
When his Brothers came he was very glad, and he related to them all that
had happened to him; how he had found the water of life and brought away
a cupful of it; and how he had rescued a beautiful Princess, who for a
whole year was going to wait for him, and then he was to return to be
married to her, and receive a rich kingdom. After this tale the three
Brothers rode away together, and soon entered a province where there
were war and famine raging, and the King thought he should perish, so
great was his necessity. The youngest Prince went to this King and gave
him the bread, with which he fed and satisfied his whole people; and
then the Prince gave him the sword, wherewith he defeated and slew all
his enemies, and regained peace and quiet. This effected, the Prince
took back the bread and sword, and rode on farther with his Brothers,
and by and by they came to two other provinces where also war and famine
were destroying the people. To each King the Prince lent his bread and
sword, and so saved three kingdoms. After, this they went on board a
ship to pass over the sea which separated them from home, and during the
voyage the two elder Brothers said to one another, "Our Brother has
found the water of life and we have not; therefore our Father will give
the kingdom which belongs to us to him, and our fortune will be taken
away." Indulging these thoughts they became so envious that they
consulted together how they should kill him, and one day, waiting till
he was fast asleep, they poured the water out of his cup and took it for
themselves, while they filled his up with bitter salt water. As soon as
they arrived at home the youngest Brother took his cup to the sick King,
that he might drink out of it and regain his health. But scarcely had he
drunk a very little of the water when he became worse than before, for
it was as bitter as wormwood. While the King lay in this state, the two
elder Princes came, and accused their Brother of poisoning their Father;
but they had brought the right water, and they handed it to the King.
Scarcely had he drunk a little out of the cup when the King felt his
sickness leave him, and soon he was as strong and healthy as in his
young days. The two Brothers now went to the youngest Prince, mocking
him, and saying, "You certainly found the water of life; but you had the
trouble and we had the reward; you should have been more cautious and
kept your eyes open, for we took your cup while you were asleep on the
sea; and, moreover, in a year one of us intends to fetch your Princess.
Beware, however, that you betray us not; the King will not believe you,
and if you say a single word your life will be lost; but if you remain
silent you are safe." The old King, nevertheless, was very angry with
his youngest Son, who had conspired, as he believed, against his life.
He caused his court to be assembled, and sentence was given to the
effect that the Prince should be secretly shot; and once as he rode out
hunting, unsuspicious of any evil, the Huntsman was sent with him to
perform the deed. By and by, when they were alone in the wood, the
Huntsman seemed so sad that the Prince asked him what ailed him. The
Huntsman replied, "I cannot and yet must tell you." "Tell me boldly what
it is," said the Prince, "I will forgive you." "Ah, it is no other than
that I must shoot you, for so has the King ordered me," said the
Huntsman, with a deep sigh.
The Prince was frightened, and said, "Let me live, dear Huntsman, let me
live! I will give you my royal coat and you shall give me yours in
exchange." To this the Huntsman readily assented, for he felt unable to
shoot the Prince, and after they had exchanged their clothing the
Huntsman returned home, and the Prince went deeper into the wood.
A short time afterward three wagons laden with gold and precious stones
came to the King's palace for his youngest Son. They were sent by the
three Kings in token of gratitude for the sword which had defeated their
enemies, and the bread which had nourished their people. At this arrival
the old King said to himself, "Perhaps, after all, my Son was
guiltless," and he lamented to his courtiers that he had let his Son be
killed. But the Huntsman cried out, "He lives yet! for I could not find
it in my heart to fulfil your commands"; and he told the King how it had
happened. The King felt as if a stone had been removed from his heart,
and he caused it to be proclaimed everywhere throughout his dominions
that his Son might return and would again be taken into favor.
Meanwhile the Princess had caused a road to be made up to her castle of
pure shining gold, and she told her attendants that whoever should ride
straight up this road would be the right person, and one whom they might
admit into the castle; but, on the contrary, whoever should ride up not
on the road, but by the side, they were ordered on no account to admit,
for he was not the right person. When, therefore, the time came round
which the Princess had mentioned to the youngest Prince, the eldest
Brother thought he would hasten to her castle and announce himself as
her deliverer, that he might gain her as a bride and the kingdom
besides. So he rode away, and when he came in front of the castle and
saw the fine golden road he thought it would be a shame to ride thereon,
and so he turned to the left hand and rode up out of the road. But as he
came up to the door the guards told him he was not the right person, and
he must ride back again. Soon afterward the second Prince also set out,
and he, likewise, when he came to the golden road and his horse set its
forefeet upon it, thought it would be a pity to travel upon it, so he
turned aside to the right hand and went up. When he came to the gate the
guards refused him admittance, and told him he was not the person
expected, and so he had to return homeward. The youngest Prince, who had
all this time been wandering about in the forest, had also remembered
that the year was up, and soon after his Brothers' departure he appeared
before the castle and rode up straight on the golden road, for he was so
deeply engaged in thinking of his beloved Princess that he did not
observe it. As soon as he arrived at the door it was opened, and the
Princess received him with joy, saving he was her deliverer and the lord
of her dominions. Soon after their wedding was celebrated, and when it
was over the Princess told her husband that his Father had forgiven him
and desired to see him. Thereupon he rode to the old King's palace, and
told him how his Brothers had betrayed him while he slept, and had sworn
him to silence. When the King heard this he would have punished the
false Brothers, but they had prudently taken themselves off in a ship,
and they never returned home afterward.




